Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)CDC>Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)>Cases & Latest Updates    !"#$%Situation SummaryOther LanguagesThis is a rapidly evolving situation and CDC will provide updated information andThis is a rapidly evolving situation and CDC will provide updated information andguidance as it becomes available.guidance as it becomes available.Updated March 26, 2020CDC is responding to a pandemic of respiratory disease spreadingfrom person-to-person caused by a novel (new) coronavirus. Thedisease has been named “coronavirus disease 2019” (abbreviated“COVID-19”). This situation poses a serious public health risk. Thefederal government is working closely with state, local, tribal, andterritorial partners, as well as public health partners, to respond tothis situation. COVID-19 can cause mild to severe illness; mostsevere illness occurs in older adults.Situation in U.S.Diﬀerent parts of the country are seeing diﬀerent levels ofCOVID-19 activity. The United States nationally is in theacceleration phase of the pandemic.  The duration andseverity of each pandemic phase can vary depending on thecharacteristics of the virus and the public health response.CDC and state and local public health laboratories aretesting for the virus that causes COVID-19. View CDC’sPublic Health Laboratory Testing map.All 50 states have reported cases of COVID-19 to CDC.U.S. COVID-19 cases include:Imported cases in travelersCases among close contacts of a known caseCommunity-acquired cases where the source of theinfection is unknown.Most U.S. states are reporting some community spread ofCOVID-19.View latest case counts, deaths, and a map of states withreported cases.
On This PageSituation in U.S.CDC RecommendsCOVID-19 EmergenceSeverityCOVID-19 Now a PandemicRisk AssessmentWhat May HappenCDC ResponseHighlights of CDC'sResponse
Other Available Resources
Conﬁrmed COVID-19 Cases GlobalMap
View larger image and seea list of locations&COVID-19cases inthe U.S.CDC RecommendsEveryone can do their part to help us respond to this emerging public health threat:On March 16, the White House announced a program called “15 Days to Slow the Spread,” which is a nationwide eﬀort to slow the spread of COVID-19 through theimplementation of social distancing at all levels of society.Older people and people with severe chronic conditions should take specialprecautions because they are at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness.If you are a healthcare provider, use your judgment to determine if a patient has signs andsymptoms compatible with COVID-19 and whether the patient should be tested. Factors toconsider in addition to clinical symptoms may include:Does the patient have recent travel from an aﬀected area?Has the patient been in close contact with someone with COVID-19 or with patientswith pneumonia of unknown cause?Does the patient reside in an area where there has been community spread of COVID-19?If you are a healthcare provider or a public health responder caring for a COVID-19 patient,please take care of yourself and follow recommended infection control procedures.People who get a fever or cough should consider whether they might have COVID-19,depending on where they live, their travel history or other exposures. More than half of theU.S. is seeing some level of community spread of COVID-19. Testing for COVID-19 may beaccessed through medical providers or public health departments, but there is notreatment for this virus. Most people have mild illness and are able to recover at homewithout medical care. For people who are ill with COVID-19, but are not sick enough to be hospitalized, pleasefollow CDC guidance on how to reduce the risk of spreading your illness to others. Peoplewho are mildly ill with COVID-19 are able to isolate at home during their illness.If you have been in China or another aﬀected area or have been exposed to someone sickwith COVID-19 in the last 14 days, you will face some limitations on your movement andactivity. Please follow instructions during this time. Your cooperation is integral to theongoing public health response to try to slow spread of this virus.COVID-19 EmergenceCOVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus. Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common inpeople and many diﬀerent species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats. Rarely, animalcoronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people such as with MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV,and now with this new virus (named SARS-CoV-2).The SARS-CoV-2 virus is a betacoronavirus, like MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV. All three of these viruseshave their origins in bats. The sequences from U.S. patients are similar to the one that China initiallyposted, suggesting a likely single, recent emergence of this virus from an animal reservoir.Early on, many of the patients at the epicenter of the outbreak in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China hadsome link to a large seafood and live animal market, suggesting animal-to-person spread. Later, agrowing number of patients reportedly did not have exposure to animal markets, indicating person-to-person spread. Person-to-person spread was subsequently reported outside Hubei and incountries outside China, including in the United States. Some international destinations now haveongoing community spread with the virus that causes COVID-19, as do some parts of the UnitedStates. Community spread means some people have been infected and it is not known how or wherethey became exposed. Learn more about the spread of this newly emerged coronavirus.'(
SeverityThe complete clinical picture with regard to COVID-19 is not fully known. Reported illnesses haveranged from very mild (including some with no reported symptoms) to severe, including illnessresulting in death. While information so far suggests that most COVID-19 illness is mild, a reportout of China suggests serious illness occurs in 16% of cases. Older people and people of all ages withsevere chronic medical conditions — like heart disease, lung disease and diabetes, for example —seem to be at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness. A CDC Morbidity & Mortality WeeklyReport that looked at severity of disease among COVID-19 cases in the United States by age groupfound that 80% of deaths were among adults 65 years and older with the highest percentage ofsevere outcomes occurring in people 85 years and older.Learn more about the symptoms associated with COVID-19.COVID-19 PandemicA pandemic is a global outbreak of disease. Pandemics happen when a new virus emerges to infectpeople and can spread between people sustainably. Because there is little to no pre-existingimmunity against the new virus, it spreads worldwide.The virus that causes COVID-19 is infecting people and spreading easily from person-to-person. OnMarch 11, the COVID-19 outbreak was characterized as a pandemic by the WHO.This is the ﬁrst pandemic known to be caused by a new coronavirus. In the past century, there havebeen four pandemics caused by the emergence of new inﬂuenza viruses. As a result, most researchand guidance around pandemics is speciﬁc to inﬂuenza, but the same premises can be applied to thecurrent COVID-19 pandemic. Pandemics of respiratory disease follow a certain progression outlinedin a “Pandemic Intervals Framework.” Pandemics begin with an investigation phase, followed byrecognition, initiation, and acceleration phases. The peak of illnesses occurs at the end of theacceleration phase, which is followed by a deceleration phase, during which there is a decrease inillnesses. Diﬀerent countries can be in diﬀerent phases of the pandemic at any point in time anddiﬀerent parts of the same country can also be in diﬀerent phases of a pandemic.
Source: CDC’s “Updated Preparedness and Response Framework for Inﬂuenza Pandemics.”.(
(
Risk AssessmentRisk depends on characteristics of the virus, including how well it spreads between people; theseverity of resulting illness; and the medical or other measures available to control the impact of thevirus (for example, vaccines or medications that can treat the illness) and the relative success ofthese. In the absence of vaccine or treatment medications, nonpharmaceutical interventions becomethe most important response strategy. These are community interventions that can reduce theimpact of disease.The risk from COVID-19 to Americans can be broken down into risk of exposure versus risk of seriousillness and death.Risk of exposure:Risk of exposure:The immediate risk of being exposed to this virus is still low for most Americans, but as theoutbreak expands, that risk will increase. Cases of COVID-19 and instances of community spreadare being reported in a growing number of states.People in places where ongoing community spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 has beenreported are at elevated risk of exposure, with the level of risk dependent on the location.Healthcare workers caring for patients with COVID-19 are at elevated risk of exposure.Close contacts of persons with COVID-19 also are at elevated risk of exposure.Travelers returning from aﬀected international locations where community spread is occurringalso are at elevated risk of exposure, with level of risk dependent on where they traveled.Risk of Severe Illness:Risk of Severe Illness:Early information out of China, where COVID-19 ﬁrst started, shows that some people are at higherrisk of getting very sick from this illness. This includes:Older adults, with risk increasing by age.People who have serious chronic medical conditions like:Heart diseaseDiabetesLung diseaseCDC has developed guidance to help in the risk assessment and management of people withpotential exposures to COVID-19.What May HappenMore cases of COVID-19 are likely to be identiﬁed in the United States in the coming days, includingmore instances of community spread. CDC expects that widespread transmission of COVID-19 in theUnited States will occur. In the coming months, most of the U.S. population will be exposed to thisvirus.Widespread transmission of COVID-19 could translate into large numbers of people needing medicalcare at the same time. Schools, childcare centers, and workplaces, may experience moreabsenteeism. Mass gatherings may be sparsely attended or postponed. Public health and healthcaresystems may become overloaded, with elevated rates of hospitalizations and deaths. Other criticalinfrastructure, such as law enforcement, emergency medical services, and sectors of thetransportation industry may also be aﬀected. Healthcare providers and hospitals may beoverwhelmed. At this time, there is no vaccine to protect against COVID-19 and no medicationsapproved to treat it. Nonpharmaceutical interventions will be the most important response strategyto try to delay the spread of the virus and reduce the impact of disease.CDC ResponseGlobal eﬀorts at this time are focused concurrently on lessening the spread and impact of this virus.The federal government is working closely with state, local, tribal, and territorial partners, as well aspublic health partners, to respond to this public health threat.Highlights of CDC’s ResponseCDC established a COVID-19 Incident Management System on January 7, 2020. On January 21,CDC activated its Emergency Operations Center to better provide ongoing support to the COVID-19 response.The U.S. government has taken unprecedented steps with respect to traveltravel in response to thegrowing public health threat posed by this new coronavirus:Foreign nationals who have been in China, Iran, the United Kingdom, Ireland and any oneof the 26 European countries in the Schengen Area within the past 14 days cannot enterthe United States.U.S. citizens, residents, and their immediate family members who have been any one ofthose countries within in the past 14 days can enter the United States, but they are subjectto health monitoring and possible quarantine for up to 14 days.People at higher risk of serious COVID-19 illness avoid cruise travel and non-essential airtravel.CDC has issued additional speciﬁc travel guidance related to COVID-19.CDC has issued clinical guidance, including:Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with Conﬁrmed Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19).Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients, including guidance on theuse of personal protective equipment (PPE) during a shortage.CDC also has issued guidance for other settings, including:Preparing for COVID-19: Long-term Care Facilities, Nursing HomesDiscontinuation of Home Isolation for Persons with COVID-19CDC has deployed multidisciplinary teams to support state health departments in caseidentiﬁcation, contact tracing, clinical management, and public communications.CDC has worked with federal partners to support the safe return of Americans overseas whohave been aﬀected by COVID-19.An important part of CDC’s role during a publichealth emergency is to develop a test for thepathogen and equip state and local public healthlabs with testing capacity.CDC developed an rRT-PCR test to diagnoseCOVID-19.As of the evening of March 17, 89 state andlocal public health labs in 50 states, the Districtof Columbia, Guam, and Puerto Rico havesuccessfully veriﬁed and are currently usingCDC COVID-19 diagnostic tests.Commercial manufacturers are now producingtheir own tests.CDC has grown the COVID-19 virus in cell culture,which is necessary for further studies, including foradditional genetic characterization. The cell-grownvirus was sent to NIH’s BEI Resources Repository for use by the broad scientiﬁc community.CDC also is developing a serology test for COVID-19.Other Available ResourcesThe following resources are available with information on COVID-19World Health Organization, Coronavirus
This is a picture of CDC’s laboratorytest kit for severe acute respiratorysyndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). CDC tests are provided to U.S.state and local public healthlaboratories, Department of Defense(DOD) laboratories and selectinternational laboratories.View Larger)(
(Page last reviewed: March 26, 2020Content source: National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases (NCIRD), Division of Viral DiseasesCoronavirus Disease 2019(COVID-19)*How to PrepareSymptoms & TestingAre You at Higher Risk forSevere Illness?If You Are SickFrequently AskedQuestionsTravel
Schools, Workplaces &Community LocationsHealthcare ProfessionalsHealthcare FacilitiesHealth DepartmentsLaboratoriesCommunicationResources
Get EmailUpdatesTo receive emailupdates about COVID-19, enter your emailaddress:+
Email AddressWhat'sthis?Submit
HAVE QUESTIONS?HAVE QUESTIONS?,Visit CDC-INFO-Call 800-232-4636.Email CDC-INFO/Open 24/7CDC INFORMATIONCDC INFORMATIONAbout CDCJobsFundingPoliciesFile Viewers & PlayersPrivacyFOIANo Fear ActOIGNondiscriminationAccessibilityCONNECT WITH CDCCONNECT WITH CDC0123456.U.S. Department of Health & Human ServicesUSA.govCDC Website Exit Disclaimer (Cases & Latest UpdatesCases & Latest UpdatesCases in the USTesting in the USWorld MapCDC in ActionSituation SummarySituation Summary
−+++++
++++++
SearchAll A-Z TopicsCoronavirus8