Correspondencewww.thelancet.com   Vol 406   October 18, 2025  1727B-cell lymphoma, including patients 
with primary refractory disease. Subset analyses of patients with primary refractory disease in the STARGLO trial showed a significant benefit for glofitamab plus GemOx. Nonetheless, patients with primary refractory disease had inferior outcomes relative to patients who relapsed, consistent with findings from studies evaluating CAR T cells as second-line therapy.
2–4 
Such patients represent a population at high risk, independent of treatment modality. To better understand the value of glofitamab plus GemOx as a second-line therapy, we recently reported an analysis of patients treated exclusively in second line.
5 Among 
115 patients treated with glofitamab plus GemOx as second-line therapy, the CR rate was 63 ·5% and median 
PFS was 25 months, both significantly superior compared with rituximab plus GemOx. A phase 2 study of lisocabtagene maraleucel in a similar patient group (second-line therapy of transplant-ineligible patients) reported a CR rate of 54% and median PFS of 9 ·0 months.
4 These studies show 
that both glofitamab plus GemOx and lisocabtagene maraleucel offer significant efficacy in this population with unmet clinical need. Longer follow-up is needed to estimate the proportion of patients ultimately cured with glofitamab plus GemOx; however, the STARGLO 2-year data appear analogous with those reported for CAR T-cell studies in comparable patients at a similar timepoint. Importantly, most patients who are eligible for CAR T cells today do not receive them due to obstacles including rapid disease kinetics and logistical, geographical, and socioeconomic barriers, underscoring the need for effective off-the-shelf treatments. Access to a range of efficacious treatment options is a great benefit for patients and physicians engaged in shared decision making.
Yutaka Shimazu highlights that 
progressive disease events for patients treated with glofitamab plus GemOx tend to occur early, 
Authors’ reply
We appreciate the responses to our Article reporting improvements in overall survival (OS), progression-free survival (PFS), and complete response (CR) rate favouring glofitamab plus gemcitabine and oxaliplatin (GemOx) over rituximab plus GemOx in transplant-ineligible patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
1 Peter Borchmann 
and colleagues appropriately highlight the availability of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy in second-line therapy for patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse large GemOx compared with rituximab plus 
GemOx, whereas no such difference was observed in Black, African American, or White patients (figure 3 of the original Article).
2,3 Although the authors 
suggested potential biases related to patient characteristics or subsequent treatments, previous therapies might have influenced outcomes, particularly PFS. For instance, could previous platinum-based regimens or bendamustine, which affect host lymphocytes, influence the efficacy of glofitamab plus GemOx?
Ad-hoc analyses to identify response 
predictors are essential for refining patient selection and maximising the benefits of glofitamab plus GemOx.
I declare no competing interests.
Yutaka Shimazu
yshimazu@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Department of Early Clinical Development, 
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606–8507, Japan
1 Abramson JS, Ku M, Hertzberg M, et al. 
Glofitamab plus gemcitabine and oxaliplatin 
(GemOx) versus rituximab-GemOx for relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (STARGLO): a global phase 3, randomised, open-label trial. Lancet 2024; 
404: 1940–54.
2 Dickinson MJ, Carlo-Stella C, Morschhauser F, 
et al. Glofitamab for relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. N Engl J Med 2022; 387: 2220–31.
3 Song YQ, Zhang HL, Huang HQ, et al. 
Glofitamab monotherapy induces high complete response rates and manageable safety in Chinese patients with heavily pretreated relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Haematologica 2024; 109: 
1269–73.  emphasising the importance of 
identifying those most likely to benefit, with which we fully agree. Our analyses confirm the superiority of glofitamab plus GemOx over rituximab plus GemOx independent of treatment refractoriness, line of therapy, International Prognostic Index score, and cell of origin. Prognostic biomarkers are urgently needed to optimally inform treatment selection, including dynamic response biomarkers; analyses of circulating tumour DNA with STARGLO are ongoing. Shimazu also enquires about the role of specific previous lines of therapy such as bendamustine. The majority (63% [115 patients receiving glofitamab plus GemOx; 57 patients receiving rituximab plus GemOx]) of patients in our study were treated in second line; therefore, this question relates to the remaining 37% (68 patients receiving glofitamab plus GemOx; 34 patients receiving rituximab plus GemOx) of patients who were treated in third line or later.
1 Recent bendamustine exposure 
has been shown to adversely affect outcomes with CAR T-cell therapy.
6 
Real-world data have indicated that bendamustine exposure within 6 months of glofitamab therapy might negatively affect response rates among patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma; however, this adverse impact of recent bendamustine exposure on response to bispecific antibodies has not been clearly established in prospective studies.
7 
Further analyses regarding the effect of previous and subsequent therapies in our study are ongoing.
JSA reports consulting fees from AbbVie, ADC 
Therapeutics, AstraZeneca, BeiGene, Bristol Myers Squibb, Caribou Biosciences, Celgene, Cellectar, Foresight Diagnostics, Genentech, Gilead, Incyte, Interius, Lilly, Miltenyi, Novartis, Roche, and Seagen; and research grants (to institution) from Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Cellectis, Genentech, Merck, Mustang Bio, Regeneron, Seagen, and Takeda. MK reports honoraria from AbbVie, BeiGene, Gilead, and Roche; research grants from BeiGene and Roche; participation on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board for Roche and AbbVie; and leadership roles at the Australasian Leukaemia and Lymphoma 
Correspondence1728  www.thelancet.com   Vol 406   October 18, 2025The authors indicated that the low 
number of intracranial bleeding events 
in the control group (n=2) precluded detailed subgroup analyses. However, understanding the distribution of recurrent intracerebral haemorrhage based on sex and age could provide valuable insights for clinical decision making if patterns align with previous works. Therefore, we respectfully request that the authors share the number of recurrent intracranial bleeding events among females and younger adults (aged <75 years). Having a knowledge of the age-based and sex-based distribution of intracerebral haemorrhage events could greatly enhance clinical understanding and guide tailored therapeutic approaches in this high-risk patient population.
MGN reports research support from the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation, Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute, Yale Claude D Pepper Older Americans Independence Center (P30AG021342), and National Institute on Ageing (K76AG088428); and is a consultant for Novo Nordisk, Merck, and HeartFlow. All other authors declare no competing interests. 
Editorial note: The Lancet Group takes a neutral 
position with respect to territorial claims in institutional affiliations.
Kuan-Yu Chi, Yu Chang, Pei-Lun Lee, 
Yu-Shiuan Lin,*Michael G Nanna
michael.nanna@yale.edu
Department of Medicine, Jacobi Medical Center, Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY, USA (K-YC, P-LL); Department of Surgery, Section of Neurosurgery, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan (YC); Department of 
Education, Center for Evidence-Based Medicine, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan (Y-SL); Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA (MGN)
1 Veltkamp R, Korompoki E, Harvey KH, et al. 
Direct oral anticoagulants versus no 
anticoagulation for the prevention of stroke in survivors of intracerebral haemorrhage with atrial fibrillation (PRESTIGE-AF): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2025; 405: 927–36.
2 Fang MC, Go AS, Hylek EM, et al. Age and the 
risk of warfarin-associated hemorrhage: the anticoagulation and risk factors in atrial fibrillation study. J Am Geriatr Soc 2006; 54:
 1231–36.  
3 Pancholy SB, Sharma PS, Pancholy DS, Patel TM, 
Callans DJ, Marchlinski FE. Meta-analysis of gender differences in residual stroke risk and major bleeding in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation treated with oral anticoagulants. Am J Cardiol 2014; 113: 485–90.Intracranial 
haemorrhage: sex, age, and treatment considerations
We read with great interest the  
Article on the PRESTIGE-AF trial,1 
which explored post-intracerebral haemorrhage anticoagulation using direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) for patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation. Although DOACs significantly reduced the risk of ischaemic stroke, they did not show an overall net clinical benefit due to a marked increase in recurrent intracerebral haemorrhage, perpetuating a challenging therapeutic dilemma in this patient population. 
Previous studies have highlighted 
important sex-based and age-based differences in anticoagulation outcomes, which could meaningfully inform clinical decisions.
2,3 Women 
have significantly lower rates of major bleeding and intracerebral haemorrhage compared with men receiving DOACs.
3 This 
observation was reinforced by the 
numerically lower recurrent intra -
cerebral haemorrhage rates among women who survived intracerebral haemorrhage compared with men in the APACHE-AF (0 [0%] of 23 females vs 4 [15%] of 27 males) and SoSTART (2 [5%] of 38 females vs 6 [10%] 
of 62 males) trials.
4 Additionally, 
advanced age was associated with an intrinsically higher risk of bleeding.
5 Lower rates of recurrent 
intracerebral haemorrhage were seen in intracerebral haemorrhage survivors younger than 75 years compared with those aged 75 years or older in both the APACHE-AF (0 [0%] of 14 younger patients vs 4 [11%] of 36 older 
patients) and SoSTART (1 [3%] of 29 younger patients vs 7 [10%] 
of 71 older patients) trials.
4 These 
patterns suggest that sex and age might affect the risk–benefit profile of DOAC therapy among intracerebral haemorrhage survivors.Group. GPG reports support from Roche for 
manuscript writing and article processing charges of 
the STARGLO trial; consulting fees from AbbVie, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Clinigen, Kite, Merck, Novartis, Roche, and Prelude Therapeutics; honoraria from AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb, Kite, Novartis, and Roche; payment for expert testimony from Johnson & Johnson and Roche; support for travel from Novartis; research grants (to institution) from AbbVie, BeOne, and Merck; participation on advisory boards for Roche, AbbVie, Merck, Kite, Prelude Therapeutics, Clinigen, Amgen, AstraZeneca, and Novartis; and leadership roles in the Australasian Leukaemia and Lymphoma Group and Haematology Society of Australia & New Zealand. CPF reports consulting fees from AbbVie, Arvinas, AstraZeneca, Autolus, Bristol Myers Squibb, GenMab, Gilead/Kite, Janssen, Incyte, Ono, Roche, SERB, and SOBI; honoraria from AbbVie, Kite/Gilead, Janssen, and Roche; travel support from Roche; and research grants from AbbVie/Genmab, Beigene, and Incyte.
*Jeremy S Abramson, Matthew Ku, 
Gareth P Gregory, Christopher P Fox 
jabramson@mgh.harvard.edu
Massachusetts General Cancer Center, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA (JSA); St Vincent’s Hospital, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia (MK); School of Clinical Sciences at Monash Health, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia (GPG); School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK (CPF)
1 Abramson JS, Ku M, Hertzberg M, et al. 
Glofitamab plus gemcitabine and oxaliplatin 
(GemOx) versus rituximab-GemOx for relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (STARGLO): a global phase 3, randomised, open-label trial. Lancet 2024; 
404: 1940–54.
2 Abramson JS, Solomon SR, Arnason J, et al. 
Lisocabtagene maraleucel as second-line therapy for large B-cell lymphoma: primary analysis of the phase 3 TRANSFORM study. Blood 2023; 141: 1675–84.
3 Locke FL, Miklos DB, Jacobson CA, et al. 
Axicabtagene ciloleucel as second-line therapy for large B-cell lymphoma. N Engl J Med 2022; 386: 640–54.
4 Sehgal A, Hoda D, Riedell PA, et al. 
Lisocabtagene maraleucel for R/R LBCL in patients not intended for HSCT: final results of the phase 2 PILOT study. Blood Adv 2025; 9: 3694–705.
5 Abramson JS, Ku M, Hertzberg M, Fox CP, et al. 
Glofitamab plus gemcitabine and 
oxaliplatin  (Glofit-GemOx) in patients with 
relapsed/refractory (R/R) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL): 2-year follow-up of STARGLO. International Conference of Malignant Lymphoma; May 28, 2025 (abstr 7015).
6 Iacoboni G, Serna S, Navarro Garces V, et al. 
Impact of prior bendamustine exposure on bispecific antibody treatment outcomes for patients with B-cell lymphoma. Blood 2023; 142: 310.
7 Haynes E, Ediriwickrema K, Lawless S, et al. 
Glofitamab and epcoritamab in the real world: a UK multicentre retrospective analysis of efficacy, tolerability and practical implications. Blood 2024; 144(suppl 1): 3100.