Correspondencewww.thelancet.com   Vol 406   October 18, 2025  1729Authors’ reply
We appreciate the Correspondence by 
Kuan-Yu Chi and colleagues regarding the PRESTIGE-AF trial,
1 which 
addresses potential age-related and sex-related differences in the bleeding risk of direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) in patients with intracerebral haemorrhage and atrial fibrillation. Two pilot-phase, randomised controlled trials reported numerically higher rates of intracranial bleeding in men than in women.
2,3 In PRESTIGE-AF, 
7 (6%) of 113 females versus 9 (4%) of 206 males had intracranial bleeding. In addition, the risk of intracerebral haemorrhage increases with age. We agree that predictors of bleeding and ischaemic events are desirable to improve the selection of patients for anticoagulation. The ongoing trials ENRICH-AF (NCT03950076) and ASPIRE (NCT03907046) and the pre-planned COCROACH individual participant data meta-analysis (PROSPERO, CRD42021246133) might provide more evidence. 
We also thank Joshua Kandiah and 
Joshua Solomon for raising the question 4 Al-Shahi Salman R, Stephen J, Tierney JF, et al. 
Effects of oral anticoagulation in people with 
atrial fibrillation after spontaneous intracranial haemorrhage (COCROACH): prospective, individual participant data meta-analysis of randomised trials. Lancet Neurol 2023; 
22: 1140–49.
5 Hayes KN, Zhang T, Kim DH, et al. Benefits and 
harms of standard versus reduced -dose direct 
oral anticoagulant therapy for older adults with multiple morbidities and atrial fibrillation. J Am Heart Assoc 2023; 12: e029865.that might  benefit from cardioembolic 
protective therapy?
We thank the authors for their 
contributions in investigating novel 
management strategies in adults with atrial fibrillation and intracerebral haemorrhage.
We declare no competing interests.
*Joshua Kandiah,   Joshua Solomon
joshua.kandiah@mail.mcgill.ca
  Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, McGill 
University, Montreal, QC H4A 3T2, Canada (JK, JS)
1 Veltkamp R, Korompoki E, Harvey KH, et al, and 
the PRESTIGE-AF Consortium. Direct oral 
anticoagulants versus no anticoagulation for the 
prevention of stroke in survivors of intracerebral haemorrhage with atrial fibrillation (PRESTIGE-AF): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2025; 405: 927–36.
2 Gabet A, Olié V , Béjot Y. Atrial fibrillation in 
spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage, Dijon Stroke Registry (2006–2017). J Am Heart Assoc 2021; 10: e020040.
3 Seiffge DJ, Cancelloni V , Räber L, et al. 
Secondary stroke prevention in people with atrial fibrillation: treatments and trials. Lancet Neurol 2024; 23: 404–17 .We commend Roland Veltkamp 
and colleagues for addressing a knowledge gap in the  PRESTIGE-AF trial
1 by assessing the 
effects of oral anticoagulants in adults with atrial fibrillation who have survived intracerebral haemorrhage. A quarter of patients who have had intracerebral haemorrhage have atrial fibrillation and have an ongoing risk of ischaemic stroke, but have historically been excluded in oral anticoagulant trials.
2,3 The PRESTIGE-AF trial design 
was pragmatic and represent s clinical 
practice well. Still, the Article raises some questions.
First, we wonder if the severity and 
volume of an intracerebral haemorrhage might be important in identifying those who would benefit from antithrombotic therapy. Would stratifying based on  
intracerebral haemorrhage volume or neurological disability better guide clinicians in patient selection for antithrombotic therapy? Furthermore, given the spectrum of disabling sequelae from ischaemic and haemorrhagic strokes, we ask the authors if a post-hoc analysis of events based on  
neurological disability might  provide 
a more meaningful understanding of the effects of oral anticoagulants in this population?
Second, a substantial number 
of patients who did not receive therapeutic anticoagulants received antiplatelet therapy, raising a concern that a protective effect could have biased harm in this trial, namely via the fixed sequence hierarchical analysis. Do the authors expect that a three-armed trial (oral anticoagulants vs antiplatelet therapy vs no therapy) 
could better identify at-risk patients of whether the severity and volume of an intracerebral haemorrhage is important for selection of patients for anticoagulation. In PRESTIGE-AF, there was a similar risk of ischaemic stroke after smaller and larger haemorrhages. The risk of recurrent intracerebral haemorrhage was higher in participants with smaller haematoma volumes compared to those with larger volumes. In view of the opposing effects of anticoagulation on ischaemic and haemorrhagic outcomes in patients with intracerebral haemorrhage in PRESTIGE-AF, Kandiah and Solomon suggest to weigh the putatively different effects of ischaemic stroke and intracerebral haemorrhage on disability. Unfortunately, this information was not captured systematically at a defined timepoint after incident events in PRESTIGE-AF. Kandiah and Solomon are concerned that the heterogeneity of antithrombotic therapy in the control group (antiplatelet or no antiplatelet) in PRESTIGE-AF might have biased harm. A systematic review of observational studies investigating the effects of antiplatelet medication versus no antithrombotic therapy in patients with intracerebral haemorrhage and atrial fibrillation found no reduction of ischaemic events in patients receiving antiplatelets compared with no antithrombotic therapy, and the rate ratio for intracerebral haemorrhage recurrence did not differ statistically significantly.
4 In PRESTIGE-AF, only 
one first recurrent intracerebral haemorrhage occurred in the control group. There was no evidence for a better preventive effect of antiplatelets compared with no antiplatelet in an exploratory analysis. Therefore, we do not think that the available evidence suggests a strong preventive effect of antiplatelets that would warrant a three-armed trial comparing DOACs versus antiplatelets versus no antiplatelet.
RV reports research support from Bayer, BMS/Pfizer, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Daiichi Sankyo, and Medtronic (institutional); consulting fees from Bayer and AstraZeneca; personal honoraria from AstraZeneca; stocks in Bayer and Novartis; and participation on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board for 
Correspondence1730  www.thelancet.com   Vol 406   October 18, 20253 SoSTART Collaboration. Effects of oral 
anticoagulation for atrial fibrillation after 
spontaneous intracranial haemorrhage in the UK: a randomised, open-label, assessor-masked, pilot-phase, non-inferiority trial. Lancet Neurol 2021; 20: 842–53.
4 Korompoki E, Filippidis FT, Nielsen PB, et al. 
Long-term antithrombotic treatment in intracranial hemorrhage survivors with atrial fibrillation. Neurology 2017; 89: 687–96.Bayer and AstraZeneca. EK has received honoraria 
from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Elpen, Innovis, Pfizer, and Sanofi; and support for attending meetings or travel from AstraZeneca, Bayer, and Pfizer. PUH has received institutional support from the EU, the German Parkinson Society, University Hospital Würzburg, the German Heart Foundation, the Federal Joint Committee (G-BA) within the Innovation Fund, the German Research Foundation, the Bavarian State, German Cancer Aid, Charité–Universitätsmedizin Berlin (within Mondafis; supported by an unrestricted research grant to the Charité from Bayer), University Göttingen (within the FIND-AF-Randomised trial supported by an unrestricted research grant to University Göttingen from Boehringer Ingelheim), and University Hospital Heidelberg (within the RASUNOA-Prime observational registry; supported by an unrestricted research grant to the University Hospital Heidelberg from Bayer, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Daiichi Sankyo); and has participated on data safety and monitoring boards for publicly funded studies by the German Research Foundation and German Ministry of Research. CF declares no competing interests. The PRESTIGE-AF trial has been supported by the German Parkinson Society, University Hospital Würzburg, the German Heart Foundation, G-BA within the Innovationfond, the German Research Foundation, the Bavarian State, German Cancer Aid, Charité–Universitätsmedizin Berlin (within Mondafis; supported by an unrestricted research grant to the Charité from Bayer), University Göttingen (within FIND-AF randomised; supported by an unrestricted research grant to University Göttingen from Boehringer Ingelheim), and University Hospital Heidelberg (within RASUNOA-prime; supported by an unrestricted research grant to the University Hospital Heidelberg from Bayer, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Daiichi Sankyo). PRESTIGE-AF was supported by the European Commission in the Horizon 2020 framework under grant agreement 754517 .
*Roland Veltkamp, Eleni Korompoki, 
Cornelia Fießler, Peter U Heuschmann
r.veltkamp@imperial.ac.uk
Department of Brain Sciences, Imperial College 
London, London W6 8RP, UK (RV, EK); Department of Neurology, Alfried-Krupp Krankenhaus, Essen, Germany (RV); Department of Neurology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany (RV); Department of Clinical Therapeutics, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Alexandra Hospital, Athens, Greece
 (EK) ; Clinical 
Trial Center Würzburg, University Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany
 (CF, PUH); Institute 
of Clinical Epidemiology and Biometry, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany (PUH)
1 Veltkamp R, Korompoki E, Harvey KH, et al. 
Direct oral anticoagulants versus no 
anticoagulation for the prevention of stroke in survivors of intracerebral haemorrhage with atrial fibrillation (PRESTIGE-AF): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2025; 405: 927–36.
2 Schreuder FHBM, van Nieuwenhuizen KM, 
Hofmeijer J, et al. Apixaban versus no anticoagulation after anticoagulation-associated intracerebral haemorrhage in patients with atrial fibrillation in the Netherlands (APACHE-AF): a randomised, open-label, phase 2 trial. Lancet Neurol 2021; 20: 907–16.Department of Error
Philis-Tsimikas A, Bergenstal RM, Bailey TS, et al. 
Once-weekly insulin efsitora alfa versus once-daily insulin degludec in adults with type 2 diabetes currently treated with basal insulin (QWINT-3): a phase 3, randomised, non-inferiority trial. Lancet 2025; 405: 2279–89—In 
this Article, the third sentence of the third paragraph of the Discussion should have read “Medication errors of interest…occurred in 15 (2%) participants in the efsitora group…”. Additionally, the appendix has been updated to include the amended trial protocol, and the following sentence has been added to the first paragraph of the Methods section: “The protocol was amended on May 13, 2022, after study initiation, to include specific details for participants who enter the study using personal continuous glucose monitoring.” These corrections have been made to the online version as of Oct 16, 2025. 