Correspondence1724  www.thelancet.com   Vol 406   October 18, 2025Asia has seen notable progress in 
legal gender recognition without 
mandatory surgeries. In Japan, a court allowed a transgender man to change his legal gender without forcing sterilisation in 2022.
2 In  
India, the 2014 National Legal Services Authority decision affirmed transgender individuals’ right to self-identify without surgery and introduced formal recognition of a category of third gender across official documents.
3 Thus, as exemplified in 
Asia, court rulings can challenge the notion that surgical transition should be a legal precondition and affirm bodily autonomy.
Recent litigation in Asia also plays a 
role in expanding transgender rights. A Hong Kong court overturned rules criminalising transgender people’s use of public toilets matching their gender identity.
4 In India, the Madras 
High Court has implemented gender-neutral toilets on its premises, setting a precedent for inclusive institutional practices.
5 In China, a transgender 
woman successfully sued a hospital for non-consensual so-called conversion therapy, receiving compensation, the first known court ruling against such practices in that country.
6 These cases 
show that, even when broader legal frameworks are limited, individual legal recourse can hold abusive institutions accountable.
In Thailand, the Government has 
allocated roughly US$4 ·3 million 
in 2025 to support gender-affirming health care, including hormone 
therapy, for about 200  000 transgender 
individuals, following the legalisation of same-sex marriage.
7 This 
combination of legal and fiscal commitment shows how public policy can reduce health-care disparities and affirm transgender communities.
Trans-activism across Asia has also 
empowered community organisations and professional education. The Sahodari Foundation in India offers scholarships, livelihood training, and creative advocacy through the arts and media to support transgender women.
8 various substances that might be used. This change would bring the wording in line with the WHO definition of sexual violence and represent a more appropriate term within legal and forensic nomenclature worldwide.
5
We declare no competing interests.
*Joseph Heskin, Amy Lyons, 
Beth Selwyn, Charlotte E Cohen, Muriel Volpellier
j.heskin@nhs.net
The Havens, Kings College Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust, London SE5 9RS, UK (JH, MV); Chelsea and Westminster Hospital NHS Foundation Trust , London, UK (JH, AL, BS, CEC); School of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK (JH)
1 Drugs Advisory Council on the Misuse of 
Drugs, Report on Drug Facilitated Sexual 
Assault. Drug facilitated sexual assault, 2007 . https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/acmd-drug-facilitated-sexual-assault-dfsa-2007 (accessed Aug 31, 2025).
2 Crime UN Office on Drugs and Crime. 
Guidelines for the Forensic analysis of drugs facilitating sexual assault and other criminal acts. 2011. https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/scientists/guidelines-for-the-forensic-analysis-of-drugs-facilitating-sexual-assault-and-other-criminal-acts_new.html (accessed Aug 31, 2025).
3 Drug Enforcement Agency, US Department of 
Justice Drug Enforcement Agency. Drug-facilitated sexual assault. 2017 . https://www.dea.gov/sites/default/files/2018-07/DFSA_0.PDF (accessed Aug 31, 2025).
4 Abbey A, Zawacki T, Buck PO, Clinton AM, 
McAuslan P. Alcohol and sexual assault. Alcohol Res Health 2001; 25: 43–51.
5 WHO. Sexual violence. 2022. https://apps.who.
int/violence-info/sexual-violence/ (accessed Sept 1, 2025).by penetration, and sexual assault. 
The importance  of these definitions 
is reflected in the sentencing recommendations for perpetrators.
Drug-facilitated sexual assault (DFSA) 
is a globally recognised term, which is used widely by legal and justice-based organisations across jurisdictions even where legal definitions differ.
1–3 
Internationally recognised terminology must account for legal ambiguity associated with its use; otherwise, it risks affecting the survivors’ journey through policing frameworks, perpetrator outcomes, and public opinion on cases. 
In DFSA, substances are used to 
alter a person’s consciousness, their recall of events, and their ability to consent before or during sex. The substances might be taken voluntarily by the victim (opportunistic DFSA) or be administered by a perpetrator (proactive DFSA). The substances used might vary by country, sexual community, and local availability. Alcohol is recognised as the most used substance, alongside benzodiazepines, γ-hydroxybutyrate, and ketamine.
4 
We call into question the accuracy of 
the term DFSA. The use of the phrase sexual assault as an umbrella term for sexual violence diminishes the true prevalence of rape, and assault by penetration, within this specific setting. Ambiguous terminology might undermine victim experiences but also be legally inaccurate. Similarly, the understanding of the word drug can vary. Many associate it only in reference to illicit substances and do not consider it to include alcohol. As the most used substance to facilitate sexual violence, its potential exclusion from the terminology might result in a failure of law enforcement agencies to recognise that substance facilitated sexual violence has occurred. 
We propose that the term drug and 
alcohol-facilitated sexual violence encapsulates the spectrum of victim experiences, uses the word violence that better describes the acts which might occur and the lasting effect it can have on survivors, and is inclusive of 
Lessons from Asia on 
transgender rights and health care
The urgent need to strengthen social 
safety for transgender and non-binary communities underscores the important challenges they face worldwide, especially in Europe and North America.
1 Nonetheless, 
a predominant focus on ongoing challenges can divert attention away from meaningful progress, such as that seen in Asia. The developments in Asia can offer lessons for advancing transgender rights and health care worldwide.
Correspondencewww.thelancet.com   Vol 406   October 18, 2025  1725and the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) 
countries (3 ·66), as well as fewer nurses 
per 1000 population (Taiwan [3 ·30] vs 
Japan [12 ·10], South Korea [8 ·37], and 
OECD countries [9 ·66]).3 More than 
35% of physicians in Taiwan work more than 60 h per week, more than 50% of those under pay-for-performance schemes do not receive bonuses, and more than 40% of physicians under bundled payments are required to share losses.
4 Excessive work hours 
and inequitable compensation contribute to physician burnout and dissatisfaction, which can lead health-care professionals to leave their positions or exit the medical field.
4,5 
Future reforms must therefore move beyond tinkering with reimbursement formulas and should rebalance workload, align monetary and non-monetary incentives with value-based care, and introduce rational cost-sharing to curb unnecessary use. We believe that embedding sustainability in system redesign is essential to preserving Taiwan’s universal health coverage and ensuring resilience against future crises.
We declare no competing interests.
Editorial note: The Lancet Group takes a neutral 
position with respect to territorial claims in published text and institutional affiliations.
*Po-Chang Lee, Cheng-Han Lee, 
Chiehfeng Chen, Min-Huei Hsu, Enoch Kang
pochang@mail.ncku.edu.tw
College of Public Health, Taipei Medical University, 
Taipei, Taiwan (P-CL); Department of Surgery, Shung-Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical University, New Taipei City 23561, Taiwan (P-CL); Department of Surgery, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan (C-HL); Department of Public Health, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (CC); Cochrane Taiwan, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (CC, EK); Division of Plastic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (CC); Graduate Institute of Data Science, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (M-HH); Institute of Health Policy & Management, College of Public Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan (EK)
1 Li J-X, Hsu S-B. Retraction—Taiwan’s national 
health care on the brink of systemic collapse. 
Lancet 2025; 405: 2036.6 Muzaffar M. T ransgender woman wins record 
compensation for ‘electric shock treatment’. UK: Independent. Nov 22, 2024. https://www.independent.co.uk/asia/china/china-transgender-woman-linger-compensation-electoshock-treatment-b2651722.html (accessed July 28, 2025).
7 Montiel A. Thailand’ s Public Health Ministry 
will allocate more than $4 million for trans health care. Yahoo News. Jan 25, 2025. https://www.yahoo.com/news/thailand-public-health-ministry-allocate-181750787 .html (accessed July 28, 2025).
8 Christopher AM. From silence to canvas: the 
role of artivism in transforming gender and sexuality norms. Sex Cult 2025; 29: 97–121.
9 Asia Pacific Transgender Network. Towards 
transformative healthcare: Asia Pacific trans health and rights module. Dec 19, 2021. https://www.weareaptn.org/resource/towards-transformative-healthcare-asia-pacific-trans-health-and-rights-module (accessed July 28, 2025).Regionally, the Asia Pacific Transgender 
Network supports providers in delivering culturally competent, rights-based clinical care by providing training modules available in multiple languages, including Bahasa, Burmese, and Tagalog.
9
Overall, focusing predominantly on 
persisting barriers risks overlooking and undermining the important, context-specific gains achieved in Asia, which have been made through community activism, progressive judgements, legislative adoption, public funding, and capacity building. These advances in Asia could offer replicable frameworks, strategies, and exemplars for advancing transgender rights and health care beyond the region.
I declare no competing interests.
During the preparation of this Correspondence the 
author used  Grammarly and Quillbot for editing support. After using these tools, the author reviewed and edited the content as needed and takes full responsibility for the content of the Correspondence.
Rowalt Alibudbud
rowaltalibudbud@dlsu.edu.ph
Department of Sociology and Behavioral Sciences, De La Salle University, Manila 1004, Philippines; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Medicine, University of the Philippines–Philippine General Hospital, Manila, Philippines
1 Restar AJ, Rodriguez-Diaz CE, Breslow AS, et al. 
Reinforcing social safety for transgender and 
non-binary communities amidst global legislative threats. Lancet 2025; 406: 110–13.
2 The Associated Press. Japan court approves a 
trans man’s request for legal recognition without needing surgery. NBC News. Feb 7, 2024. https://www.nbcnews.com/nbc-out/out-news/japan-court-approves-trans-mans-request-legal-recognition-needing-surg-rcna137736 (accessed July 28, 2025).
3 Bhattacharya S, Ghosh D, Purka yastha B. 
‘Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act’ of India: an analysis of substantive access to rights of a transgender community. J Hum Rights Pract 2022; 14: 676–97 .
4 Leung K. Hong Kong judge rules in fav or of 
transgender bathroom access. ABC News. July 25, 2025. https://abcnews.go.com/International/wireStory/hong-kong-judge-rules-favor-transgender-bathroom-access-123986739 (accessed July 28, 2025).
5 Menon P. Denying access to restrooms has 
serious health ramifications for gender non-conforming people. The Hindu. Dec 11, 2024. https://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/health/denying-access-to-restrooms-has-serious-health-ramifications-for-gender-non-conforming-people/article68968229.ece (accessed July 28, 2025).Systemic strains and 
reform imperatives in Taiwan’s health-care system
We commend  Jing-Xing Li and Shu-
Bai Hsu for their courage in retracting 
their Correspondence upon discovering 
inaccuracies in the presentation of information and references concerning Taiwan’s health-care system.
1 
Nevertheless, their Correspondence warrants attention because it deconstructs the urgent and persistent challenges within emergency departments, illustrating how fee-for-service and universal health coverage models interact with high health-care demands and workforce shortages.
2 
The fee-for-service model, which reimburses providers for prescriptions and diagnostic tests, has inadvertently prioritised quantity over quality.
3 
National health insurance with low co-payments ensures high accessibility, but also contributes to irresponsible resource use and a high physician–patient ratio, which unavoidably places considerable strain on the health-care system.
3 Taiwan also faces a persistent 
shortage of health-care professionals. In 2020, Taiwan had fewer doctors 
per 1000 population (2 ·39) c ompared 
with Japan (2 ·60),  South Korea (2 ·51) , 