Office of Data Science Strategy  /  1
NIH Strategic Plan 
For Data Science 
2025 –2030 
Letter from NIH Director 
Monica Bertagnolli 
Biomedical research relies on an interplay between scientific observation, hypothesis 
development, experimental design, data analysis, and interpretation. The increasingly powerful 
data resources produced by National Institutes of Health (NIH)-funded research and the rapid 
proliferation of data science technologies available to modern biomedical and behavioral 
researchers have advanced our understanding of living systems and led to medical breakthroughs. 
But we can do so much more. Currently, optimal data use for research remains limited by 
challenges with managing, sharing, and integrating data and technology in a usable, secure, and equitable way. But data science’s opportunity to dramatically accelerate improved health 
outcomes for all is more inspiring than daunting. 
With its mandate to galvanize the energy, talent, and creativity of the broadest possible research 
community, the NIH must play a critical role in establishing and maintaining a Biomedical Data 
Ecosystem that moves beyond data collection and sharing to actively fostering practical and ethical 
data use. The 2025-2030 NIH Strategic Plan for Data Science provides a bold vision for the future 
of data science at the NIH.  The fi ve goals – built on the solid foundation laid by the initial data 
science strategy and rooted in NIH’ s mission to seek fundamental knowledge to protect and 
enhance health – prepare NIH to adapt and adv ance in a changing data science ecosystem. 
This strategic plan supports the vision of NIH to enhance data-driven discovery to advance 
biological knowledge, better characterize the health and health outcomes of all people, and foster the development of new technologies and care delivery approaches. Moreover, this strategy 
encourages the scientific community to share data and better integrate data science practices into 
their research. However, this work must extend beyond the mainstream scientific community. 
For example, every person has something important to contribute to advancing health by 
allowing their health data to be used for research. NIH must, therefore, earn and maintain the 
public’s trust through engagement and empowerment of their contributions to data and data 
science. The plan addresses this imperative by emphasizing cross-disciplinary collaborations, 
including public-private and researcher-clinician-community partnerships, to find opportunities 
and solve challenges together. 
I am thrilled to introduce this new strategic plan that will carry us forward through the next five 
years. This plan embraces unprecedented technological changes like generative artificial 
intelligence (AI) development, availability, and growing interest in quantum information sciences. 
Growth in the diversity and extent of biomedical and behavioral data is equally rapid, with the 
research community gaining access to powerful, new, NIH-supported assets like the  All of Us 
research program, Human Pangenome, Human Connectome Project, and so much more. The 
NIH Biomedical Data Ecosystem, with its development advanced by this new strategic plan, will 
bring increasingly effective data and tools that enable the broadest research community possible to contribute to our mission to bring better health to all people. It is an incredible time to engage in biomedical and behavioral research, and I cannot wait to see what the future brings! 
Monica M. Bertagnolli, M.D. 
Director, National Institutes of Health Table of Contents 
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2 
Emerging Opportunities for Biomedical and Behavioral Data Science ......................................................................... 4 
Plan Content and Implementation ............................................................................................................................................... 8 
GOAL 1 : Improve Capabilities to Sustain the NIH Policy for Data Management and Sharing .............. 10 
OBJECTIVE 1 -1: Support the Biomedical Community to Manage, Share, and Sustain Data ............................... 12 
OBJECTIVE 1 -2: Enhance F AIR Data and Greater Data Harmonization ........................................................................ 14 
OBJECTIVE 1 -3: Strengthen NIH Data R epository and Knowledgebase Ecosystem............................................... 16 
Partnerships and Measuring Progress ...................................................................................................................................... 19 
GOAL 2 : Develop Programs to Enhance Human Derived Data for Research .................................................. 20 
OBJECTIVE 2 -1: Improve Access to and Use of Clinical and Real-W orld Data.......................................................... 22 
OBJECTIVE 2 -2: Adopt Health IT Standards for R esearch ................................................................................................. 24 
OBJECTIVE 2 -3: Enhance the Adoption of Environmental and Lifestyle Exposome in Health R esearch....... 25 
OBJECTIVE 2 -4: Empower Clinical Data Science through Cross-Disciplinary T raining.......................................... 26 
Partnerships and Measuring Progress ...................................................................................................................................... 27 
GOAL 3 : Provide New Opportunities in Software, Computational Methods, and AI ................................ 28 
OBJECTIVE 3 -1: Enhance Health for All through AI .............................................................................................................. 30 
OBJECTIVE 3 -2: Develop Cutting Edge Software T echnologies ...................................................................................... 32 
OBJECTIVE 3 -3: Supporting F AIR Software Sustainability ................................................................................................. 33 
Partnerships and Measuring Progress .................................................................................................................................... 35 
GOAL 4 : Support a Federated Biomedical Research Data Infrastructure ......................................................... 36 
OBJECTIVE 4 -1: Develop, Test, Validate, and Implement W ays to Federate NIH Data and Infrastructure ..... 38 
Partnerships and Measuring Progress ....................................................................................................................................... 41 
GOAL 5 : Strengthen a Broad Community in Data Science ........................................................................................ 42 
OBJECTIVE 5 -1: Increase T raining Opportunities in Data Science .................................................................................. 44 
OBJECTIVE 5 -2: Develop and Advance Initiatives to Expand the Data Science W orkforce ................................ 45 
OBJECTIVE 5 -3: Enhance Data Science Collaboration within the NIH Intramural R esearch Program............ 46 
OBJECTIVE 5 -4: Broaden and Champion Capacity Building and Community Engagement Efforts ................ 47 
Partnerships and Measuring Progress ...................................................................................................................................... 49 
Endnot es ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 50 
Appendix 1: Accomplishments from the First NIH S trategic Plan for Data Science ........................................... 52 
Appendix 2: Abbreviations .......................................................................................................................................................... 54 
S trategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 National Institutes of Health  /  1 
Introduction 
Modern biomedical and behavioral 
science benefits from the fundamental 
transformation of basic biological and 
biomedical experiments and data 
science-enabled clinical studies that drive 
discoveries. To put it simply, data enable 
new opportunities for scientific inquiry. 
This updated NIH Strategic Plan for 
Data Science sets a bold vision for the 
future, in which data generated in 
individual care and from biomedical and 
basic research become powerful inputs 
that enhance our understanding of 
fundamental biology and enable the 
development of new clinical treatments 
and diagnostic technologies. Data science includes genomics, transcriptomics, 
proteomics, metabolomics, imaging, and other 
data underlying basic biological experimentation. 
Data science also consists of clinical trial data; 
real-world data (RWD) from electronic health 
records (EHRs), sensors, and wearables; geospatial 
data; public and community health research; 
surveys; and data from social, environmental, and 
observational studies. The vision articulated in 
this strategic plan supports the NIH Policy for 
Data Management and Sharing (DMS Policy).1 It 
embraces data-driven discovery as a powerful tool 
to elucidate biological processes, better characterize the health needs of the American people, and foster the effective and efficient use of new methodologies 
such as those arising from artificial intelligence (AI) 
and machine learning (ML). Progress toward the 
promise of data-driven discovery requires a unified effort across the NIH Institutes, Centers, and Offices 
(ICOs) that is coordinated and stimulated by the 
resources of the NIH Office of Data Science Strategy 
(ODSS). To accomplish the goals set forth with this 
vision, NIH will address key challenges and explore 
opportunities to: 
❱Generate and disseminate  Findable, Accessible, 
Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR) data to foster 
greater sharing and add value to NIH research 
investments.2 
❱Develop cost-effective strategies  for sustainable, 
secure, and accessible biomedical data repositories, 
workspaces, and knowledgebases. 
❱Acquire and protect data obtained from EHRs 
and other RWD, including data captured outside of 
traditional health care settings, to preserve privacy 
and confidentiality and promote participant consent. 
❱Promote the emergence of innovations in AI 
approaches that are FAIR, validated, and accurate. 
❱Create opportunities  for innovative technologies 
and computing paradigms such as quantum 
computing and digital twins to advance 
biomedical research. 
❱Foster a data science workforce  across 
institutions and regions. 
In support of the NIH mission and the goals of the 
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) 
to increase data sharing, modernize data infrastructure, and develop AI capacity, the 2025-
2030 NIH Strategic Plan for Data Science articulates 
the NIH’ s strategic views, goals,  and objectiv es to 
advance data science over the next fi ve years. By 
addressing these challenges, NIH will pioneer robust and efficient data governance frameworks, ensuring 
data integrity, security, and accessibility while 
promoting cross-disciplinary collaborations that 
accelerate scientifi c discovery. 
The 2025-2030 NIH Strategic Plan for Data 
Science builds on accomplishments from significant 
collaborations of NIH ICOs under the initial NIH 
Strategic Plan for Data Science.
3 Experiences with 
public-private partnerships and alignment with 
activities across the federal sector demonstrate that 
collaboration is key to developing robust solutions for 
leveraging data science in the biomedical and health 
research enterprise. Advancing data science requires NIH to leverage its partnerships with many actors, 
including health care delivery systems, private sector 
industries in technology and pharmaceuticals, non-
profit patient representative groups and community partners, and other government agencies. 
This strategic plan includes a summary of emerging 
opportunities and challenges facing NIH and 
delineates strategic objectives for each of the five 
goals. Associated with each strategic objective are 
suggested implementation tactics and evaluation schemes. Achievement of the vision outlined in this 
plan will position the NIH to accelerate discovery 
in biomedicine and health, improving health for all 
Americans through more relevant, comprehensive 
scientific findings and developing a workforce of 
researchers and clinicians skilled in the use of data 
science methods for discovery and care that 
contribute to US leadership at the frontier of science 
and technology. Goals 
This strategic plan will prepare NIH to face 
the acceleration of sophisticated new technologies and address the rapid rise in the quantity and diversity of data by accomplishing five overarching goals. 
GOAL 1 
Improve Capabilities to Sustain the NIH P
olicy for Data Management 
and Sharing 
GOAL 2 
Develop Programs to Enhance Human Derived Data for Research 
GOAL 3 
Provide New Opportunities in Software, Computational Methods, and AI 
GOAL 4 
Support a Federated Biomedical Research Data Infrastructure 
GOAL 5 
Strengthen a Broad Community in Data Science 
2  /  S trategic Plan for Data Science National Institutes of Health  /  3 
Emerging 
Opportunities for Biomedical and Behavioral Data Science Significant advances in data science have been 
made since the initial NIH Strategic Plan for 
Data Science (Appendix I). For example, NIH 
has maintained data-sharing policies for 
several decades and is taking a bold step 
forward with the final DMS Policy – which 
articulates the need to prospectively plan for 
how scientific data and accompanying 
metadata4 will be managed and shared. NIH 
defines metadata as information intended to 
make scientific data citable, interpretable, and 
reusable. NIH will continue to support data 
management and sharing capabilities that reduce barriers to and the cost of sharing research data, advancing NIH’s goals to 
promote research safety, transparency, 
and reproducibility. New opportunities and guidelines are needed to 
enhance trustworthy data repositories that align with 
community expectations and contain open metrics 
that demonstrate the impact of data sharing. 
New capabilities and resources are needed to enable 
researchers to improve the automated collection of 
valuable metadata during the research process. 
These capabilities and resources should be consistent 
with community expectations and standards and 
enable easier data sharing in appropriate 
repositories. Moreover, new opportunities and 
guidelines are needed to enhance trustworthy data 
repositories that align with community expectations 
and contain open metrics that demonstrate the 
impact of data sharing. Finally, developing new 
methodologies for computational interoperability 
across data repositories and knowledgebases enables 
more research on complex, hard-to-collect data, 
increasing the productivity of NIH’s research and 
development investments. 
Today, there is potential to create federated networks 
that connect the billions of data points stored in 
EHRs, other RWDs such as wearable data, and 
clinical trial data obtained from medical systems 
and medical research institutions nationwide. 
However, to maximize the potential of these data to 
discover new treatments and cures, there needs to 
be broad adoption of standardized data exchanges 
and integration. Through the Health Level Seven 
International (HL7®)5 Fast Healthcare Interoperability 
Resources (FHIR®)6 specification, certified health 
information technology (IT) products will have 
standardized application programming interface 
(API) capabilities to facilitate health data sharing. 
Leveraging and building on the FHIR® standard allows 
for the exchange and sharing of EHR data, phenotypic 
data obtained from clinical and genomics studies, 
clinical records and community data, and eventually, 
other data from medical devices such as wearables and 
sensors. These all represent promising new avenues 
for clinical research. The ability to gather individual 
health data over time offers tremendous opportunities 
to accelerate research and medical breakthroughs and enable individualized preventions and treatments. 
This is the vision of several NIH initiatives, including 
the All of Us7 Research Program. 
The National Clinical Cohort Collaborative (N3C)8 
illustrated the power of a collective data initiative. 
N3C pulls data in 4 standard models from 77 health 
systems representing more than 230 organizations. 
Data are harmonized with the Observational Medical 
Outcomes Partnership  (OMOP) Common Data Model 
every week. N3C represents the largest de-identified 
limited datasets for COVID-19 research and uses 
privacy-preserving linkages to other RWD, such as 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) 
and mortality data. Advances like those seen in the 
All of Us  and N3C programs require standardized 
vocabularies and ontologies, including communities 
from different biomedical science and medicine areas. 
Experiences during the pandemic also emphasized 
the importance of using and promoting common 
data elements (CDEs), as was illustrated in the 
Rapid Acceleration of Diagnostics (RADx)9 initiative, 
which developed a core set of CDEs used across all 
RADx-funded projects. In addition, RADx’s Mobile 
At-Home Reporting through Standards (MARS)10
program established a core set of CDEs and a standard 
HL7® specification to facilitate standardized public 
health reporting of at-home COVID-19 test results. 
CDEs continue to lack standardized semantics and 
ontologies. As a goal, this updated Strategic Plan for 
Data Science advocates for creating minimal sets, 
or core CDEs, which can be achieved by creating 
standardized concepts with allowable responses and 
data representations that would enable and broaden 
clinical and health data use. 
Another challenge for the data science research 
community is leveraging the massive datasets derived 
from the same individual across multiple data 
repositories and resources to preserve participant 
4  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 National Institutes of Health  /  5
identity and their intent for sharing. The situation 
is further complicated by including time-dependent 
participant data collection methods and requires data 
linkages. This can only be accomplished if these data 
have compatible standards and models. Addressing 
these challenges requires new governance policies for 
data linkage and approaches to ensure participants’ 
autonomy is respected. Technical capabilities are also needed to support data harmonization and aggregation across different sources, including 
lifestyle data. These challenges open the door for new 
algorithms that ensure data security, governance, 
quality management, and participant consent, 
utilizing privacy-preserving computing, generative AI, 
foundation models, and blockchain methods. 
Machine learning, deep learning, and AI technologies 
are significant opportunities to adv ance basic and 
clinical research and improve health and health care 
at individual and community levels. Recognizing 
these opportunities, NIH launched the Bridge to 
Artificial Intelligence
11 (Bridge2AI) program in 2022 
to produce new flagship biomedical and behavioral 
datasets (see textbox for Bridge2AI). Creating AI-
ready data requires the tools to collect FAIR data 
at the beginning of the research process (FAIR by 
design-intentional integration of FAIR principles 
from the start of the data lifecycle). It also requires 
methods complementary to the Collective benefit, 
Authority to control, Responsibility, and Ethics 
(CARE) principles12 for Indigenous data sovereignty 
and governance. New capabilities to facilitate Tribal 
data sovereignty that respects cultural needs and expectations are also needed. 
Efforts are also ongoing to utilize cloud service 
providers for data storage and management and 
to create interoperable data systems, efforts to 
enhance biomedical AI for ethical and unbiased data and algorithms,
13,14 and to develop tools that 
enable researchers to collect, find, and utilize 
FAIR data and software. Through the Science and 
Technology Research Infrastructure for Discovery, 
Experimentation, and Sustainability (STRIDES)15
initiative, the NIH partnership with cloud service 
providers Amazon Web Services (AWS), Google 
Cloud Services, and Microsoft Azure has resulted 
in significant increases in data storage, data access, 
and the use of computational data platforms. Many 
NIH ICOs have leveraged STRIDES and have created 
cloud-based data repositories. However, much of 
these data remain siloed and are not utilized to their fullest potential. Addressing this challenge 
will require NIH to leverage a modern, federated 
data architecture approach. This approach will enable NIH to create cost-effective and sustainable 
practices tailored to individual ICOs’ needs and allow 
researchers to take full advantage of biomedical data 
in the cloud with shared scientific analysis capabilities 
at unprecedented scales. 
Today, technological innovations in AI and new 
capabilities to optimize large language models 
(LLMs) have generated considerable interest in the 
possibility of AI recognizing, summarizing, translating, predicting, and generating text and other content 
based on knowledge gained from massive datasets. 
Yet, challenges remain in creating transparent and 
explainable datasets and models. The need for 
transparency, validation, and unbiased principles and 
frameworks, as well as connecting those principles/ frameworks to practice for developing and using AI in 
biomedical research, remains an important priority 
and an unmet need. New paradigms in data discovery and knowledge generation
16 that utilize the integrative 
power of advanced AI methods and models would 
enable researchers and citizen scientists to explore 
and use data to address complex questions involving 
diverse and heterogeneous datasets. 
Beyond AI, other technological breakthroughs are 
emerging, including advances in quantum computing, digital twins, privacy-enhancing computing such 
as federated learning, and privacy-preserving 
data sharing using blockchain. Other applications 
are emerging in scientific fields such as physics, 
engineering, computer science, and other industries, 
from manufacturing to finance. The intersection 
of these emerging and re-emerging technologies 
and biomedical research has incredible innovative potential. Expanding NIH investments in these 
advanced technologies will better position the 
biomedical and health research community and the 
agency to take full advantage of these and other new 
capabilities. 
To progress in the next five years, NIH must leverage 
the exponential growth in the amount and variety 
of data by developing and deploying sophisticated 
approaches for data management and embracing advanced technologies, including new methods in data 
reduction and compression for downstream analysis, 
while preserving information. Cloud computing will 
continue to play a significant role in sharing and 
utilizing scientific workflows at an unprecedented 
scale. By taking advantage of current and emerging 
data and computing technologies from the commercial 
and public sectors, NIH could realize exabyte-scale 
data science in the next decade. 
Bridge to Artificial Intelligence  (Bridge2AI) 
will propel biomedical research forward by 
supporting the widespread adoption of AI 
that tackles complex biomedical challenges 
beyond human intuition. 
Generat e   
New flagship biomedical and 
behavioral data sets. 
Develop   
Software and standards to unify 
data attributes. 
Creat e   
Automated tools to accelerate 
the creation of FAIR and ethically 
sourced data sets.
Provide   
Resources to disseminate data, ethical 
principles, tools, and best practices.
Create   
Training that bridges the AI, biomedical, 
and behavioral research communities.1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 National Institutes of Health  /  7
Plan Content and Implementation 
This updated Strategic Plan for Data 
Science is organized into five goals 
corresponding to strategic objectives and 
implementation tactics.  These goals will 
ensure th at NIH’s strategic approach will 
address reliability , protect participant 
privacy and confidentiality, and increase 
efficiency, trust, and transparency in AI 
while collectively improving data and 
tools for research.  This strategic plan also 
supports th e DMS Policy by developing 
new capabilities to streamline data access 
with  a renewed emph asis on metadata 
consistency and accuracy, the use of 
CDEs, and support for utilizing 
community-driven sch emas and 
ontologies to enable data discovery 
across collections and repositories. This strategic plan also addresses data science gaps in 
the intramural research program and encourages 
increased and targeted collaborations to realize 
sharable opportunities for data and software. This strategic plan aims to enhance NIH’s ability to 
leverage AI technologies for biomedical and behavioral 
research, improve clinical and health care data for research, and integrate efficiency, responsibility, and 
transparency into its visions and objectives. 
The implementation tactics are a roadmap for 
achieving the overarching goals and strategic 
objectives. Details of these implementation tactics will 
be determined by the NIH Associate Director for Data 
Science in collaboration with working groups 
established by the NIH Scientific Data Council (SDC) 
and NIH Data Science Policy Council (DSPC), in These efforts will increase the scientific 
community’s ability to address new challenges in accessing, managing, analyzing, integrating, and reusing the enormous amounts of data generated by the biomedical research enterprise. 
consultation with the NIH ICOs, other federal and 
international agencies, the research community, the 
private sector, and other key stakeholder groups. NIH 
will continually assess and adjust these priorities 
based on the needs of NIH and its stakeholders and 
new opportunities in response to new technologies and 
capabilities to address the health of the nation. 
Through the implementation of this strategic plan 
during the next five years, NIH will: 
❱Develop  new programs to support innovative
approaches to data curation, harmonization, and 
validation and increase support for communities 
developing and implementing new CDEs and 
standards in priority disease areas. 
❱Increase  support for research on clinical and health
care data science, including new methods for privacy
protection, participant-informed consent, and data
governance.
❱Increase  support for developing tools to collect and
analyze data from wearable devices and other new
RWD technologies that can be leveraged for health.
❱Develop  new research, training programs, and
collaborations to advance the impact of responsible
AI in biomedical/health research. Provide new ways
for researchers to search, discover, access, and
analyze data across resources and enhance these
capabilities’ accuracy, validity, transparency, and
reproducibility.
❱Engage  researchers and communities in data
science training across biomedical, social,
environmental, and behavioral disciplines.
This strategic plan aligns with Digital NIH: Innovation, 
Technology, and Computation for the Future. Digital 
NIH proposes new approaches to managing and governing NIH technology investments. It also 
describes a framework to guide the implementation of 
high-priority, high-value capabilities. Finally, it 
identifies cross-cutting capabilities that will support 
data science within NIH (see textbox for Digital NIH). 
This strategic plan will encourage greater integration 
of data science to improve access to and use of 
biomedical and behavioral data. These efforts will 
increase the scientific community’s ability to address 
new challenges in accessing, managing, analyzing, 
integrating, and reusing the enormous amounts of 
data generated by the biomedical research enterprise. 
Digital NIH  identifies new governance and 
funding approaches and capabilities organized 
by four functional areas: Extramural Research 
Management, Intramural Basic Research, 
Intramural Clinical Research, and Administration 
and Management. Efforts in the five cross-
cutting themes support Digital NIH with the 
following:
❱A common architecture with well-defined
standards to enable integration.
❱Innovative, cutting-edge storage, analytics, and
computational infrastructure.
❱Increased technical competency of the
workforce at all levels.
❱Technology to support an anywhere, anytime
workplace of the future.
❱Risk-based, embedded cybersecurity
protections.
8  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 National Institutes of Health  /  9
OVERAR CHING GOALS , STRA TEGIC OBJECTIVES , 
AND IMPLEMENTA TION TACTICS 
Goal 1 
Improve Capabilities to Sustain 
the NIH Policy for Data Management and Sharing 
NIH is committed to data management and 
sharing across two decades of policies to 
create and support a data-sharing culture. 
For example, the final DMS Policy 
emphasizes the importance of good data 
management practices and encourages 
data management and sharing that reflect 
practices within research communities. 
Data management and sharing should 
reflect practices consistent with FAIR 
principles to be most beneficial. NIH-
supported and NIH-managed repositories 
are the building blocks of the NIH data 
ecosystem and one of the primary 
mechanisms by which NIH makes the 
results of federally funded data available to 
the research community and the public. 
Federally funded data repositories should 
adopt the Office of Science, Technology, and Policy (OSTP) Desirable 
Characteristics of Data Repositories.
17   
They should also align with community 
standards such as the Transparency, 
Responsibility, User focus, Sustainability, 
and Technology (TRUST) principles.18 The TRUST principles provide a 
framework for formalizing the 
capabilities of a repository to serve its 
intended scientific community 
efficiently. Together, the FAIR, CARE, 
and TRUST principles and the National 
Science and Technology Council 
(NSTC) Guidance provide a framework 
for formalizing the capabilities of a 
repository (see textbox for NSTC 
Desired Characteristics of Data 
Repositories). NSTC ensures that 
federal investment in research that 
results in scientific data is accessible to 
accelerate biomedical discoveries, 
advance human health, and maximize 
America’s return in dollars invested in 
scientific research. NIH will continue to 
promote and support researchers’ 
ability to comply with the DMS Policy 
expectations by providing resources 
and guidance to researchers. 
NIH will also develop new frameworks 
to handle the needs of modern data 
science challenges. For example, the 
National Center for Advancing 
Translational Sciences (NCATS) is 
developing the Maintainable, 
Observing, Securing, and Timing 
(MOST) framework to augment the 
FAIR and CARE principles. The MOST 
framework is a new paradigm for 
managing data “in use” that emphasizes 
the importance of maintainable data infrastructure and policies, observing 
and understanding data as it is 
generated. This ensures data security compliance during data ingestion, 
validation, and utilization. This 
framework has guided several 
significant initiatives, including the 
Rare Diseases Clinical Research 
Network  (RDCRN), N3C, and A 
Specialized Platform for Innovative 
Research Exploration (ASPIRE).
19  
In addition, NIH will promote data 
repository interoperability. NIH 
seeks to create a FAIR-enabled data 
ecosystem that will break down data 
silos and promote greater findability 
and accessibility of data, thereby 
preventing unnecessary duplication 
of efforts and maximizing NIH 
investments. 
NSTC Desired Characteristics of Data Repositories are designed to 
be relevant to all repositories that manage and share data from 
federally funded research. The 
characteristics are organized across 
three themes:
❱Organizational Infrastructure
❱Digital Object Management
❱Technology
In addition, additional 
characteristics for repositories 
storing human data must be able to 
address privacy protections, 
confidentiality, and security. 
National Institutes of Health  /  11National Institutes of Health  /  11 10  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 10  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030

OBJECTIVE 1 -1 
Support the Biomedical Community 
to Manage, Share, and Sustain Data 
The DMS Policy established requirements that emphasize 
the importance of good data management practices. It 
also established the expectations for maximizing the 
appropriate sharing of relevant scientific data generated 
from NIH-funded or -conducted research, with justified 
limitations or exceptions. This policy applies to research 
funded or conducted by NIH-supported researchers that 
results in the generation of scientific data. By requiring researchers to anticipate their needs for managing and 
sharing scientific data, NIH will ensure that researchers 
develop data management and sharing plans to promote 
transparency, reproducibility, and replicability. This 
forward-thinking policy integrates data management and 
sharing into the routine conduct of a scientific project. In 
the process, NIH aims to shift the biomedical research 
culture into one in which data sharing and reuse are the 
rule rather than the exception.
20 NIH is developing 
resources to support the DMS Policy compliance 
activities of their funded investigators, including the NIH 
Office of Extramural Research (OER) sharing website,21
the NIH Biomedical Informatics Coordinating 
Committee’s portal to key data repositories,22 and the 
National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development’s (NICHD)’s Data Repository Finder to 
support the development of data management and sharing plans. Supporting the DMS Policy requires a 
coordinated effort between the Office of Science Policy 
(OSP), OER, Office of Intramural Research, ODSS, and 
other NIH ICOs. As such, NIH will establish and enhance 
guidelines, processes, data-sharing tools-, and training in 
data management and sharing and will explore funding 
and governance models to ensure a sustainable NIH 
data-sharing infrastructure for researchers, NIH staff, 
and data stewards and librarians, including those at low 
resourced institutions. Implementation Tactics 
❱Strengthen the core data management
competencies of researchers, data stewards,
data librarians, and NIH program and grants
management officers with tools and training:
❱For researchers: Core data management
and sharing competencies.
❱For data stewards23 and librarians:
Promote and enhance FAIR data sharing at
their institutions.
❱For NIH staff: Evaluate and improve data
management and sharing practices andplans.
❱Enhance programs providing credit and
incentives for sharing data, including
working with publishers, academic
institutions, and other funding organizations
and agencies.
❱Develop metrics to measure data sharing,
reuse, and impact.
❱Establish  a data steward program to guide
data sharing, leverage existing activities at
the Network of the National Library of
Medicine (NNLM) National Center for Data
Services, and support additional training
partnerships, including with societies and
associations.
❱Support tool development and leverage
existing tools that will assist researchers with
preparing, annotating, and sharing their data.
12  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 12  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030By requiring researchers to anticipate their 
needs for managing and sharing scientific data, 
NIH will ensure that researchers develop data 
management and sharing plans to promote 
transparency, reproducibility, and replicability. 
NIH will encourage using community-agreed-upon 
standard schemas and metadata, enhance automated 
ontologies and curation processes, and create capabilities 
for greater data discovery and interoperability across 
multiple data repositories and knowledgebases. 
OBJECTIVE 1 -2 
Enhance FAIR Data and 
Greater Data Harmonization 
Through enhanced data-sharing efforts and the NIH 
STRIDES Initiative , NIH-supported investigators 
have generated and made over 200 petabytes of data 
available in the cloud. This represents a significant 
amount of biological data, including genomics, clinical 
studies, phenotypic and omics data, fitness measures 
and survey data, and data derived from electronic 
health care systems and lifestyle data. These data are 
most valuable when researchers combine different 
data to answer challenging questions such as “What is 
the relationship between obesity and diabetes in 
children?” Answering these questions requires 
wrangling, aggregating, and comparing datasets with 
supported efforts in standardizing collections, formats, 
and data models/dictionaries. The key to success in 
data interoperability is the development and use of 
agreed-upon data standards, standardized 
terminologies, and CDEs. The NIH CDE Task Force includes a governance committee that reviews and 
provides NIH endorsements to submitted CDEs, which 
are then deposited into the NIH CDE Repository,
24 
hosted by the National Library of Medicine (NLM), for use by researchers to help share and combine datasets. 
Other resources for CDEs include the National Cancer 
Institute’s (NCI) Enterprise Vocabulary Services 
(EVS)
25 and the Cancer Data Standards Registry and 
Repository (caDSR).26 
During the past five years, several large NIH programs 
have undertaken an effort to enhance data harmonization, including Helping End Addiction 
Long-Term (HEAL)
27 (see textbox for HEAL CDE 
program) that is standardizing metadata; NCI’s Cancer 
Data Aggregator28 that is mapping harmonized data 
elements to FHIR®, OMOP, and other data models; National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research 
(NIDCR)’s FaceBase29 that is providing guides to 
scientists to produce harmonizable metadata/data; 
and other large programs such as All of Us , which is 
harmonizing clinical data to the OMOP data model. In 
addition, community efforts such as the Minimal 
Common Oncology Data Elements (mCODE)30 provide 
an agreed-upon data standard that can be widely adopted and increase high-quality data for all cancer 
types. International funders, such as the International 
Alliance for Mental Health Research Funders, have 
established a community of funders, medical journals, 
and data measurement experts committed to adopting an agreed-upon set of mental health science 
standards.
31 NIH applauds these efforts to support the 
development of standardized outcome measures in 
basic and clinical research. Creating standardized 
outcome measures, when appropriate, will allow for 
normalized analysis, interpretation, and more accurate reporting of results. These standardized measures of 
behavioral and health outcomes facilitate cross-study 
comparisons and improve the interpretability and 
reporting of research findings and translation into 
evidence-based clinical practice but will need to be 
balanced with the flexibility that enables innovative 
clinical research. 
To further enhance the data ecosystem, NIH will 
encourage using community-agreed-upon standard 
schemas and metadata, enhance automated ontologies 
and curation processes, and create capabilities for 
greater data discovery and interoperability across 
multiple data repositories and knowledgebases. This 
objective will inform future activities of the NIH Plan 
for Public Access to Research Results. 
Implementation Tactics 
❱Enhance abilities to improve data and 
metadata quality, including data quality 
assurance and quality control. 
❱Encourage  usage of open and standardized 
schemas, ontologies, and data formats. 
❱Enhance automated processes for ontology 
use and data curation, including metadata 
enrichment. 
❱Create a minimal set of consistent and 
computable CDEs or concepts with consistent 
data models. HEAL Common Data Element (CDE) Program 
The NIH HEAL Initiative research portfolio spans 
many data types that are rich resources for 
future studies. The initiative’s CDE Program 
supports its Public Access and Data Sharing 
policy, which requires researchers to develop 
plans to share their project’s underlying primary 
data and will connect and expose data via 
the HEAL Platform . 
Clinical pain research grantees collaborate and 
agree to use CDEs across nine core pain 
domains for patient-reported outcomes (PROs) 
to facilitate cross-study comparisons and 
improve the interpretability of findings. 
National Institutes of Health  /  15 14  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 
Repository Ecosystem Initiative (GREI) and support for 
the use of persistent unique data identifi ers through a 
consortium membership with DataCite.32 By partnering 
with DataCite, NIH data resources will be able to 
enhance data sharing and enable researchers to cite 
and reuse research outputs. These efforts strengthen 
data management and sharing by enhancing v isibility, 
citation in scholarly publications, preservation, future 
data reuse, and access. 
As the size and diversity of data collected and stored 
from biomedical and behavioral research continues 
to grow and NIH enhances its modernized data 
ecosystem, the need to make these research data and 
information FAIR underscores the critical role of 
data repositories and knowledgebases. Developing 
sustainable data resources requires understanding 
and using metrics to evaluate a repository’s usage, Data repositories and knowledgebases are essential 
to maximizing the value of the scientific research 
enterprise and serve as critical components in the 
implementation of the DMS Policy, preserving, 
archiving, and sharing scientific data. As the volume, 
velocity, and variety of data collected and stored from 
biomedical research continue to increase, the need for 
making scientific research data and information FAIR 
and the vital role of repositories and knowledgebases 
will continue to play a critical role in accelerating 
scientific discoveries to improve health. As articulated 
in the first Strategic Plan for Data Science, NIH 
makes a distinction between data repositories and 
knowledgebases as follows: 
Biomedical data repositories  accept the 
submission of relevant data from the research 
community and store, organize, validate, archive, 
preserve, and distribute data in compliance with the 
FAIR data principles. Curation focuses on quality 
assurance and quality control. 
Biomedical knowledgebases  extract, accumulate, 
organize, annotate, and link the growing body 
of information related to and reliant on core 
datasets. Information curation is often required in 
knowledgebases. 
NIH has separately supported data repositories and 
knowledgebases as valuable assets and recognizes that 
these unique resources require funding mechanisms 
and review panels tuned to the needs of data science 
resources. Data resources and good data management 
practices are the keys to discovering, integrating, and 
reusing data and knowledge. To sustain a healthy and 
productive data resource ecosystem, it is critical to 
ensure that data repositories and knowledgebases: 
❱Deliver  scientific impact to the communities that 
they serve. 
❱Employ and promote good data management 
practices and efficient operation for quality 
and services. ❱Engage  with the user community and 
continuously address their needs. 
❱Implement, adopt, or contribute  to openly 
shared metrics. 
❱Provide  sufficient metadata and semantic 
annotation. 
❱Support  a process for data life-cycle analysis, 
long-term preservation, and trustworthy, 
responsible stewardship. 
NIH supports both unrestricted access and controlled 
access to data repositories. NIH controls access to 
some data to protect participants who have provided 
information to advance NIH’s research efforts. Such 
data can contain sensitive information or Controlled 
Unclassified Information that requires safeguarding. 
To respect research participants’ autonomy, privacy, 
and confidentiality, data are stored in Controlled-
Access Data Repositories (CADRs) to manage and 
share research participant data at the individual or 
aggregate/cohort level. Controlled access datasets 
often have data use limitations requiring NIH 
authorization which, although necessary, can pose 
challenges to accessibility by the research community. 
Controlled access processes are labor- and resource-
intensive, which limits their scalability and speed 
to access data for research. To accelerate research 
while protecting sensitive data, NIH is developing, 
testing, and deploying advanced technologies 
and restructuring data management processes to 
streamline controlled-access procedures. In addition, 
NIH seeks to develop common approaches and 
infrastructure and bring all CADRs to NIH-wide 
system standards for security postures for addressing streamlined data access and more easily detect and 
mitigate data management incidents across NIH-
supported repositories. 
In recent years, NIH developed several capabilities to 
promote a data ecosystem, including a collaborative 
approach for data management and sharing with seven 
generalist repositories (see textbox for Generalist Strengthen NIH Data Repository 
and Knowledgebase Ecosystem 
Generalist Repository Ecosystem Initiative 
(GREI) is a collaborative effort with Dataverse, 
Dryad, Figshare, OSF, Mendeley Data, Vivli, 
and Zenodo to: 
❱Establish  a standard set of cohesive and 
consistent capabilities, services, metrics, 
and social infrastructure. 
❱Raise general awareness and help 
researchers adopt FAIR principles to share 
better and reuse data. 
❱Establish  consistent metadata, develop use 
cases for data sharing, and train and educate 
researchers on FAIR data and the importance 
of sharing. OBJECTIVE 1 -3 
16  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 National Institutes of Health  /  17  
National Institutes of Health  /  19National Institutes of Health  /  19utility, and impact. Moreover, promoting easier 
access to research products with appropriate security 
controls and privacy protections, including human 
subjects protections, as outlined in the “Desirable 
Characteristics of Data Repositories for Federally 
Funded Research”, will continue to be central to 
the NIH goals. 
Just as necessary in adopting FAIR principles are the 
principles for the governance of data generated by 
or specific to American Indians and Alaska Natives 
(Indigenous data). Indigenous data are intrinsic 
to Indigenous Peoples’ capacity and capability to 
realize their human rights and reflect the crucial 
role of data in advancing Indigenous innovation and 
self-determination. The CARE principles outline 
goals for Indigenous data governance that reaffirm 
the principles of Indigenous self-governance and 
self-determination. As a first step, NIH developed supplemental information to the DMS Policy on 
“Responsible Management and Sharing of American 
Indian/Alaska Native Participant Data
33” due to Tribal 
consultation. Similarly, international data sharing 
should respect regional and population-specific data 
governance considerations, especially involving data generated in low- and middle-income countries. 
The ubiquitous use of data resources in biomedical 
research, coupled with a greater emphasis on 
data management and sharing, has dramatically 
amplified the need for NIH to ensure the stability and 
robustness of widely used data resources. Over the last 
five years, NIH has made advances in understanding 
its portfolio of supported data resources (i.e., data 
repositories and knowledgebases), but this has 
also revealed their vulnerabilities concerning long-
term support – especially in light of their growing 
size, complexity, and demands from the research 
community. With growing concerns about the 
sustainability of data resources, NIH aims to articulate 
a coherent framework for their long-term support. 
The challenges NIH faces in supporting widely 
used data resources are mirrored at the federal and 
international levels. NIH provides the most significant 
support for the most commonly used biomedical data 
resources, with resources managed by NLM serving as 
an essential node in the international biomedical data 
ecosystem. For this reason, NIH has been involved in 
several efforts, including CoreTrustSeal,
34 Research 
Data Alliance (RDA),35 DataOne,36 Open Science 
Framework,37 DataCite,38 the Wellcome Trust,39 and 
the Global Biodata Coalition.40 For more than 30 
years, NLM has worked globally to preserve data and 
enable broad data sharing by coordinating with critical resources such as those comprising the International 
Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration,41 and 
continuing to develop relationships with critical global 
actors. These organizations provide a platform for the 
international community to work together better to 
coordinate the management and sharing of scientific data. Over the next five years, NIH will continue efforts to facilitate the long-term sustainability of the 
global biodata ecosystem that is relied upon by all 
biomedical researchers, including NIH-funded ones. 
Implementation Tactics 
❱Enhance data repositories and knowledgebases that
promote impartial access to all in alignment with theOSTP memo about Desirable Characteristics of DataRepositories for Federally Funded Research.
❱Enhance FAIR, CARE, and TRUST capabilities thatensure secure and effective data management andpromote data governance and sovereignty.
❱Support methods and programs with Tribalcommunities to develop Tribal data governance andsharing that recognize Tribal rights in data.
❱Promote shared data management practices, utilizeopen metrics for impact, including enhancing datacitation practices, and guide data preservation andlong-term data archiving.
❱Develop a comprehensive, coherent, acceptablesustainability framework for identifying andsupporting the most widely used and impactful NIHdata resource portfolio.
❱Develop a single policy framework that governscontrolled data access repositories and standardizedlanguage for institutions and researchers.
❱Streamline controlled data access processes acrossNIH repositories, including greater use of automation.
❱Develop a common approach and infrastructure foraddressing data management incidents acrosscontrolled access data repositories.
❱Develop a single approach to help investigators find
and appraise the relevance of controlled access datain NIH repositories, which enables metadata sharing.
❱Enhance the visibility and use of NIH intramuralresearch datasets and data resources.
❱Develop methods to promote computationalinteroperability across data repositories andknowledgebases.
GOAL 1 
Partnerships and 
Measuring Progress 
Potential measures of progress for this goal 
include data-resource key performance 
indicators for data resources and individual 
datasets, quantity and interoperability of databases and knowledgebases, quantity 
and citations of datasets deposited (over 
baseline), ability to find datasets across 
multiple resources, and data lifecycle FAQs. 
NIH will support and engage in partnership 
and collaboration across various 
stakeholders, including RDA, GO-FAIR, 
biomedical societies, and international 
partnerships such as with the Global 
Alliance for Genomics and Health (GA4GH), 
ELIXIR, and Global Biodata Coalition. 
18  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030
20  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 20  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030OVERAR CHING GOALS , STRA TEGIC OBJECTIVES , 
AND IMPLEMENTA TION TACTICS 
Goal 2 
Develop Programs to 
Enhance Human Derived Data for Research 
Data discoveries that aim to improve human health and underpin new 
treatments require a wide range of participant data, including clinical 
data, gathered for the broad purpose of clinical research: Health care 
data, including medical history, records, and information necessary 
for patient care and treatment. During the last decade, the United 
States has seen an increase in the generation and usage of this data 
in research, including through efforts such as the All of Us Research 
Program. These efforts are enhanced by large-scale data collection and 
curation that utilize agreed-upon common standards and data models. 
While progress has been made, integrating multiple types of RWD with 
other data sources remains a challenge because the interpretation of 
health care-derived data for research purposes is highly dependent 
on the context of the interactions between patients, their health care 
providers, and their health environment. 
Adopting and integrating health care data standards with research data standards 
is required to enable the biomedical and behavioral research community to take full 
advantage of the multitude of health-derived data. Where appropriate, NIH will work 
with federal agencies, medical institutions, health IT developers, and vendors to bridge 
the technology or data gaps between health care settings and clinical research. To enable 
researchers to gather and integrate data of interest to address health-related questions, 
NIH will improve access to data repositories that hold participant-derived data and 
enhance abilities to link RWD from multiple sources with appropriate informed consent 
from the participants. NIH will support approaches to leverage or build on existing 
programs, bring new partnerships together to enhance clinical data science, and support 
cross-training between clinician-researchers, data scientists, and other technical experts/ 
stakeholders. A primary goal is to increase the use and utility of health care-derived data 
for research with proper security and privacy safeguards. Activities that integrate clinical 
data and RWD should be developed to achieve this goal, including data from wearables 
and data originating from health care settings such as mental health, dental, pathology, 
and ophthalmology settings. 
National Institutes of Health  /  21
OBJECTIVE 2 -1 
Improve Access to and Use of 
Clinical and Real-World Data 
The health care enterprise is a rich data source for 
biomedical and behavioral researchers. However, 
methods and policies for sharing these data with the 
broader research community differ in complexity 
from more traditional research settings and data-
sharing expectations and approaches. Unique 
challenges in data quality, privacy and confidentiality, 
policy, regulation, and ethics require considerations 
when sharing and using health care and administrative 
data. Informed consent for collecting, using, and 
sharing these data is essential for respecting 
participant rights and maintaining public trust. 
NIH will increase the capabilities of informed 
consent processes and transparency in how participant 
data is used in research. This is particularly 
pertinent to the specific challenges for data science 
in clinical use cases to build trust, explainability, 
and transparency into the systems and processes 
leveraging participant data. These activities are 
consistent with and build on recent NIH guidance and 
templated informed consent language42 for secondary 
research use of data and specimens. 
In addition, wearable device data require substantial 
efforts to extract, transform, and structure owing to challenges like securing personal information and 
the suitability of this data for research. There are 
several existing models for sharing health data with 
researchers: independent hospitals forming networks 
or consortia to exchange data with each other 
and with select external researchers; professional 
societies engaging with their member institutions and 
membership to establish data sharing agreements 
and new channels for data sharing (e.g., National 
Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering 
[NIBIB]’s Medical Imaging and Data Resource Center [MIDRC]);
43 data enclaves or secure networks that support federated learning where computational tools 
can be sent and data can be stored or disseminated 
without the need for data exchange; and NIH 
supported enclaves (e.g., NCATS N3C and All of Us ). 
Although each approach has benefits and challenges, 
all are essential for the NIH data ecosystem. NIH is 
committed to improving data FAIRness, transparency 
of data governance and stewardship expectations, and 
streamlining requirements for accessing and using 
data derived from care. 
In understanding the relationship between health, 
environment, and lifestyle, researchers find that 
linking and combining individual-level health data 
with other RWD and digital sources improves our 
understanding of health and disease. However, 
challenges remain in developing multi-modal data 
from richly characterized research participants. In 
addition, linked data provides greater opportunities 
for researchers to study epidemiological factors. For 
example, the National Eye Institute (NEI) recently 
articulated the need to include vision-specific data 
missing from large-scale research efforts, such as the 
NIH All of Us  Research Program and the Genotype-
Tissue Expression Project (NEI Strategic Plan).44 
Similarly, new and improved environmental data 
sources continue to emerge from industry, federal 
agencies, and the research community, as well as 
through new AI methods for estimating individual-
level exposures. 
However, a need remains to better understand 
data linkage’s ethical, legal, and social implications. 
Additionally, researchers must know how to define and 
apply rules to protect study participants and navigate 
relationships with the public and private sectors to 
ensure that linked data is appropriately governed, 
shared, and used. NICHD recently commissioned In understanding the relationship between health, 
environment, and lifestyle, researchers find that linking and combining individual-level health data with other RWD and digital sources improves our understanding of health and disease. 
Implementation Tactics 
❱Enhance methods for informed consent in cases 
where data are combined from multiple sources and/ 
or combined over longitudinal studies. 
❱Create, test, validate, and adopt methods to enable 
researchers to use multi-modal and digital data 
combined from multiple sources, including 
partnerships with other agencies, where appropriate. 
❱Establish  and promote standards for new types of 
health data, such as data captured from home health 
care devices. 
❱Enable  federated frameworks that will allow sensitive 
data to be utilized in clinical research, including 
fostering data linkages and interoperability across 
existing NIH-supported RWD platforms. 
❱Develop governance and policy frameworks to guide 
data linkages in different use case scenarios. 
❱Leverage existing agreements and infrastructure 
to create avenues for researchers to use and 
access health care and administrative datasets, 
enhancing participant control of their data and 
how they are used. 
a report on the technology and governance 
considerations for pediatric pandemic record 
linkages45 that articulate a need to define collaborative 
governance approaches, technical requirements, and 
the data elements required to ensure high-quality 
linkage. NIH will collaborate with other federal, 
academic, and private partners to explore avenues for 
researchers to use and appropriately combine health 
care data sources where allowable. 
National Institutes of Health  /  23 22  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 
OBJECTIVE 2 -2 
Adopt Health IT Standards for Research 
Data sharing is essential to expedite the translation of 
research into knowledge, products, and procedures 
that will improve human health and accelerate the 
development and improvement of treatments for 
diseases. While there may be benefits to biomedical 
and behavioral research in connecting and sharing the 
billions of data points stored in EHRs and clinical trial 
records across thousands of medical systems, there are 
significant challenges in making use of these data for 
research. For example, these data lack consistency in 
standardization. NLM maintains the Unified Medical 
Language System (UMLS)46 to distribute key 
terminology, classification, and coding standards, 
supports to key terminologies that are now required 
for use in certified EHRs (e.g., Systematized 
Nomenclature of Medicine [SNOMED], Logical 
Observation Identifiers Names and Codes [LOINC], 
RxNorm, among others), and associated resources to 
promote more effective and interoperable biomedical 
information systems and services. 
Data sharing has made significant progress in the 
health care community, partly due to the development 
and adoption of terminology and exchange standards. 
In 2020, NIH held the virtual workshop, Advancing 
the Use of Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources 
(FHIR®) in Research . This workshop brought together 
leaders in data science and research from across 
federal agencies to develop a framework for increasing 
the use of FHIR® for research (see textbox for FHIR®). 
The workshop discussed the interplay needed between 
policy and technical advances, the opportunities for 
FHIR® to expand the sources of data that can be 
integrated into the larger “system of care” to support 
both clinical care and clinical research, the opportunity that FHIR
® presents to increase data reuse across both 
clinical care and research settings and is enabling 
patients to access their clinical data. In addition, 
FHIR® or other such systems should facilitate 
population science to foster the integration of 
community-based research. 
To further advance NIH’s goal to bridge the gap 
between health care settings and applied and clinical research, NIH will strengthen the use of ontologies 
with vocabularies and terminologies (e.g., SNOMED, 
LOINC) and exchange standards such as FHIR®. NIH 
will partner with health data standards bodies, 
organizations, and other federal agencies that work 
with health data standards, including developing 
research use cases for United States Core Data for 
Interoperability Plus (USCDI+) and Trusted Exchange 
Framework and Common Agreement (TEFCA). 
The Fast Healthcare Interoperability 
Resources (FHIR®) standard enables electronic 
health care data exchange through an 
application programming interface (API). An API 
is a specified set of protocols and data 
standards that establish the ground rules by 
which one information system directly 
communicates with another. Software 
developers can seamlessly connect their systems 
to one another through FHIR® API to transmit 
electronic health data.
Implementation Tactics 
❱Implement agile programs that convene researchers
and developers to develop, test, validate, and adopt
health IT and standards based on scientific use cases
and provide feedback based on lessons learned.
❱Promote development, training, and adoption of
FHIR® and related technologies, such as SMART on
FHIR®, to enable further clinical research tools and
data exchange in research infrastructure, cohortdiscovery, and applied real-world research.
❱Partner with other agencies such as the Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy (ASTP),
large health care systems, health technology groups,
and researchers to develop use cases outlining
how health data standards can benefit and enhance
scientific data analysis.OBJECTIVE 2 -3 
Enhance the Adoption of 
Environmental and Lifestyle Exposome in Health Resear
ch 
The environmental and lifestyle exposome encompasses 
all environmental exposures an individual experiences 
throughout life, including diet, physical activity, social 
factors, pollution, and toxins. It provides a fuller picture 
of health influences beyond genetics and clinical data 
alone. Several studies have shown that environmental 
exposures (e.g., pollution and toxins) and lifestyle factors 
(e.g., diet and substance use) are significant contributors 
to the development and progression of various chronic 
diseases such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, and 
neurodegenerative conditions. By leveraging lifestyle and 
environmental data alongside traditional biomedical 
inputs, researchers can unlock more profound insights 
into the root causes of chronic diseases and health 
disparities, ultimately improving prevention, diagnosis, 
and treatment strategies. Incorporating these factors into 
AI-driven health research can lead to more accurate and 
personalized models for predicting disease risk, understanding health trajectories, and designing targeted 
interventions. However, this can be accomplished by 
adopting standardization, collection, reporting, and 
leveraging lifestyle and environmental data measures in 
both existing and emerging data sources and fostering 
appropriate data linkages with EHRs, clinical research, and genomic data. Implementation Tactics 
❱Identify lifestyle and environmental
determinants of health.
❱Support demonstration projects to test how
best to capture these data for interoperable 
electronic data exchange.
❱Develop infrastructure and tools for
extracting structured and unstructured data
from multiple sources and enable iterative
models to include these data in training.
❱Enable  the linkage of these data with other
data, such as clinical, RWD wearable sensor,omics data, and administrative data, anddevelop demonstration projects to show the
technical feasibility of such linkages when
appropriate and when there are no increased
risks of reidentification for small communities.
❱Support real-world pilots integrating
environmental and lifestyle data withclinical CDEs.
By leveraging lifestyle and environmental 
data alongside traditional biomedical inputs, 
researchers can unlock more profound insights 
into the root causes of chronic diseases. 
  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 24 National Institutes of Health  /  25
National Institutes of Health  /  27National Institutes of Health  /  27
OBJECTIVE 2 -4 
Empower Clinical Data Science 
through Cross-Disciplinary Training 
NIH recognizes that maintaining and enhancing clinical research 
informatics as a career path requires clinical training and training 
in informatics, analytics, data models, and standards. This training 
will focus on using data from clinical, health care, and real-world 
settings to understand better the regulatory and policy standards 
for generating and using this data. Equally important is the need to 
provide health science training to individuals with strong 
backgrounds in data science. Cross-training between data 
scientists and clinical researchers would pave the way for 
interdisciplinary research and help reach new research areas 
(National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases 
[NIDDK] Strategic Plan47, National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke [NINDS] Strategic Plan48). Data management 
and linking require social, technological, and data science 
partnerships. Research involving linking multiple data types and 
exposure to new opportunities in technologies will require a diverse cadre of colleagues for future collaborations. In addition, 
other health-related research fields, including dental and ophthalmology, can benefit from enhanced data science training to 
integrate clinical data, imaging data, and omics data with diverse 
data types from other health-related fields, including social science. Implementation Tactics 
❱Support cross-training between data
scientists, clinical researchers, and nurses
engaged in research at various stages of
the academic tracks.
❱Develop training on consent practices
and responsible data use beyond legal
and regulatory requirements, with
special considerations for linked/
merged data.
❱Develop trainings on data sharing,
management, transparency, provenance,
and data quality for clinical research.
❱Create networking opportunities for
clinical and data science researchers todevelop collaborations, build teams, and
learn from experts on these topics.GOAL 2 
Partnerships and 
Measuring Progress 
NIH understands the strength of partnerships and 
collaborations for biomedical and behavioral research 
innovation. NIH will seek partnerships and 
collaboration across multiple stakeholders, including 
ASTP, in implementing relevant data standards, large 
health care systems and health technology groups, and 
applicable standards development organizations. 
Significantly, NIH will increase and improve 
community engagement and partnership opportunities 
to collectively build trust, tools, and frameworks for 
biomedical and clinical data science uses. 
For this goal, potential measures of progress need to 
address how these activities are advancing biomedical 
research and include greater use of RWD, increased 
utilization of FHIR® for data exchange, including 
creating or fine-tuning implementations to address 
research needs, new examples of discovery and 
harmonization, new or enhanced CDEs for 
interoperability and reproducibility, and increased use 
of existing and new standards in clinical and research 
applications and increasing the number of and 
reducing processing time for data access requests. 
26  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030

National Institutes of Health  /  29 28  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030
OVERAR CHING GOALS , STRA TEGIC OBJECTIVES , 
AND IMPLEMENTA TION TACTICS 
Goal 3 
Provide New Opportunities 
in Software, Computational Methods, and AI 
The biomedical research enterprise generates Immense amounts of data from 
fundamental experiments using cells and research organisms to clinical studies and 
community-level epidemiological research . These data are valuable for the original 
research question and secondary data analyses for study replication or for oth er 
research ers asking different questions. Harnessing research data for data-driven 
discovery  remains a significant challenge that requires attention to data quality, 
quantity,  computability, standards, and new computational and AI methods. 
AI49 consists of a collection of data-driven 
technologies with the potential to advance 
biomedical research significantly. Advances in AI 
have led to exciting opportunities, including 
improvements in protein structure prediction and 
protein design, computer-aided diagnosis with 
medical images, better understanding of cancer 
phenotypes, and LLMs to interpret clinical, 
electronic health care records and reports to aid 
in clinical decision support. AI algorithms can 
analyze vast amounts of data, identify complex 
patterns, and gain deeper insights into 
fundamental scientific phenomena. These 
approaches allow researchers to unlock new avenues for exploration, drive scientific 
discoveries, and further our understanding of 
underlying principles in various fields of health. 
With the ability to process billions of parameters, 
AI could significantly improve future health 
research via decision support systems, rapid data 
annotation, including medical and tissue image 
processing, and the daunting task of organizing 
large bodies of disparate medical information. 
However, utilizing AI for biomedical research and health care practices is still hampered by 
inconsistent and incomplete data. Making 
data FAIR and AI-ready requires multi-
disciplinary expertise, experimentation, and, 
often, iterative feedback from AI applications 
and experts. In particular, establishing ground 
truth, standardization, and validation of training datasets is fundamental in biomedical applications where inaccuracies 
have amplified repercussions for patients, providers, and researchers. 
AI is a priority across federal agencies, and as 
such, the National AI Initiative Act of 2020
50 
called on the National Science Foundation (NSF), 
in coordination with OSTP, to form a National AI 
Research Resource (NAIRR) Task Force. This 
Task Force laid out a plan to establish the NAIRR 
with four measurable goals in mind: (1) spur 
innovation, (2) increase the breadth of talent, (3) improve capacity, and (4) advance trustworthy AI. 
The roadmap to implementing the NAIRR
51 calls 
for an all-of-government approach to leveraging 
resources, such as massive computing 
infrastructures, extensive data, and a growing talent pool of researchers, to realize this vision. 
For the initial pilot period, NIH contributes 
high-quality data assets, privacy-preserving 
methods, responsible practices, and methods 
for growing capacity, broadening participation 
in AI, and co-leading NAIRR Secure with the 
Department of Energy (DOE).  
To enhance the robustness and utility of data 
analysis and processing methods, NIH will take advantage of innovations in open and 
sustainable software and algorithms. NIH will support partnerships to co-design emerging 
capabilities, including new techniques in AI, 
including generative AI, computational image 
analysis, and machine vision; new 
infrastructures such as quantum information 
sciences; automated workflows, and new tools 
for researchers to leverage data in a transparent, 
explainable, responsible, and effective manner; 
and new ways of enabling communities to 
develop software through collaborative projects. 
NIH is removing barriers to innovation and 
empowering a broader research community to 
make AI work for all Americans.
 
National Institutes of Health  /  29 28  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025–2030 
OBJECTIVE 3 -1 
Enhance Health for All through AI 
AI has shown promise in improving medical diagnoses 
and understanding underlying biological processes. 
The rapid growth in the volume of data generated 
through EHRs and other biomedical research provides 
a rich foundation for AI applications to improve health 
for all. However, realizing this potential requires 
overcoming several challenges. Key considerations 
include ensuring transparency and reproducibility, 
accounting for ethical, legal, and social implications, 
and engaging in risk mitigation in AI systems. Making 
data FAIR and AI-ready also requires interdisciplinary 
skills. Particularly for biomedical and behavioral 
research, AI readiness necessitates attention to 
individual and societal impacts of datasets used to train the AI models. While different classes of AI may 
have unique data requirements, AI generally requires 
machine-readable data that are well described with 
ontologies and schema so that the algorithm can parse 
data. Including data quality, such as accuracy, completeness, consistency, and reliability, in AI 
metadata standards will help address the 
trustworthiness of the information provided by AI 
algorithms. Misrepresentation in datasets, algorithms, and applications raises risks and increases potential 
harms related to privacy, confidentiality, and the health of all Americans. The National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) Artificial 
Intelligence Risk Management Framework 
(AI RMF 1.0)
52 identifies risks and/or potential 
harms. It discusses how managing these risks will lead 
to more trustworthy AI systems and enable AI 
developers and users to understand better and take 
responsibility for their models’ and systems’ potential 
limitations and uncertainties. 
Many data-related challenges hinder fully leveraging 
AI capabilities. Data quality is critical because datasets 
often contain inconsistencies, errors, and missing values, leading to inaccurate model outputs. AI 
algorithms require large and comprehensive datasets 
to train models. Achieving reliable and repeatable 
results from these models across different care settings 
and environments requires consistent and 
representative data. Additional challenges arise when 
using multiple data types with AI (i.e., multimodal AI), 
including integrating and aligning various data types 
(including text, images, audio, video, and omics) and 
managing the heightened computational and storage 
requirements. In the biomedical research domain, an 
additional data-related challenge is that, without 
proper protection, AI models can inadvertently leak 
sensitive health data through mechanisms such as 
training data memorization, model inversion attacks, 
and membership inference attacks. 
Additionally, the shortage of skilled AI researchers and 
clinicians and the persistence of siloed scientific 
approaches further hinder progress. To fully leverage 
AI in biomedicine, fostering innovative, cross-
disciplinary frameworks, building trusted partnerships 
that empower researchers and communities across the 
U.S., and promoting responsible and inclusive AI
adoption in health care is essential. Recognizing these
challenges, NIH launched the AIM-AHEAD program
in July 2021 (see textbox for AIM-AHEAD). It is a
nationwide network of institutions and organizations
designed to build AI talent and technology and
support multidisciplinary research projects that
harness AI to improve the health of the public. The
program strengthens the AI capabilities and
infrastructure of institutions and hospitals that
otherwise would not have had the resources or the
capacity to investigate advances in AI.
To fully take advantage of AI innovations, creating 
reproducible, trustworthy, and accurate AI tools, 
complete data, and robust practices is critical. Living To fully leverage AI in biomedicine, fostering innovative, 
cross-disciplinary frameworks, building trusted partnerships that empower researchers and communities across the U.S., and promoting responsible and inclusive AI adoption in health care is essential. 
resources (frameworks, tools, best practices) – based 
on agile iteration with the research community – 
across the continuum of AI development can lower 
barriers to entry and enable researchers to focus on 
innovation. Connecting principles embraced across 
the private, non-profi t, and academic sectors to these 
resources will allow practical approaches for researchers by building trust, explainability, and 
transparency. 
Essential goals for NIH are to enhance AI methodology 
and technologies that expand on the unique 
opportunities for biomedical and health research and 
to ensure that AI capabilities contribute to improving the health of all Americans. In partnership with the 
NIH ICOs, the agency will support advanced 
technologies and AI to integrate multiple streams of 
data, including genomic, nutritional, sensor-based, 
social and behavioral, exposure, and community-level 
data to develop explanatory theoretical models and to 
inform prevention efforts (NICHD Strategic Plan,
53 
National Institute of Mental Health [NIMH] Strategic 
Plan,54 National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
[NHLBI] Strategic Vision55). 
NIH’s AIM-AHEAD is a large nationwide 
network of institutions and organizations 
designed to:
❱Build  talent of AI researchers and clinicians
and promote AI literacy for non-practitioners.
❱Improve health by supporting multidisciplinary
research projects that harness AI.
❱Enhance the AI capabilities and infrastructure
of institutions and communities across the US.Implementation Tactics 
❱Develop socio-technical solutions, including
resources and guidelines, to improve the quality of
AI training sets and algorithms and support their
rigorous assessment, validation, and adoption.
❱Build  a robust pipeline of AI researchers and
clinicians while promoting literacy of AI among
non-practitioners.
❱Establish and operationalize  community
engagement for improved data, methods, and
sources for AI. When appropriate, support research
in developing, validating, and using synthetic
clinical datasets for AI training and applications.
❱Develop tools and training opportunities to help
researchers create and prepare FAIR and AI-ready
data, including ontologies, schema, and data
quality measures.
❱Support the development and use of responsible
AI models with appropriate metadata (model cards)
that are explainable, transparent, and FAIR.
❱Leverage new technologies and methods for
foundational models to accelerate biomedical and
behavioral research.
❱Support opportunities to develop new AI
technologies that enable data translation to
knowledge, including AI tools for data cleaning,harmonization, integration, and metadata
collection.
❱Enhance NIH capabilities in AI through
partnerships across federal agencies and
communities to develop new methods in AI.
30  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 –  2030 National Institutes of Health  /  31
OBJECTIVE 3 -2 
Develop Cutting 
Edge Software Technologies 
NIH is poised to take advantage of the integration of real-
world devices, the increased scale of computational resources, 
and significant automation in software and algorithms to advance biomedical discoveries and innovation. For example, 
new methods that can integrate multidimensional data from a 
variety of sources, including molecular, wearable sensors, 
environmental, and survey data, are needed to develop 
predictive and actionable models of weight gain, weight loss, 
and weight loss maintenance and to clarify the role of obesity 
in the risk, prevention, and treatment of cardiopulmonary and 
sleep disorders (NHLBI Strategic Vision
56). Multi-dimensional 
data integration remains a significant challenge for biomedical 
and behavioral research. 
Additionally, low-code, no-code technologies allow trainees 
and citizen scientists to develop functional applications via 
“drag-and-drop” software platforms or on the web, with 
appropriate training. New opportunities to enhance 
biomedical and behavioral research through the support of 
digital twins approaches to model organs, systems, 
individuals, and populations; new capabilities for privacy-
preserving computing and preserving technologies; and 
quantum computing should also be explored. Finally, best 
practices for transparent, open, and reusable software and 
algorithm development should be supported. Implementation Tactics 
❱Adopt and adapt  emerging and 
specialized methods, algorithms, tools, 
software, and workflows for biomedical and 
behavioral scientific discovery. 
❱Enhance tools and workflows for greater 
automation while maintaining robust, 
responsible, and transparent standards. 
❱Leverage new passive and mobile devices 
and technologies for data collection and analysis with improved practices for 
informed consent. 
❱Facilitate FAIR software and algorithms 
with sufficient documentation and 
metadata and enhance ethical frameworks. 
❱Leverage advances in computational 
methodologies and studies to create new 
opportunities for ethical and social science 
research. 
❱Investigate the potential of digital twins 
approaches to organs, systems, individuals, and populations. 
❱Explore opportunities to combine theory-
based modeling and simulations with 
data-driven capabilities. 
❱Promote opportunities to expand the 
software development community by 
making these resources accessible to more people. OBJECTIVE 3 -3 
Support FAIR Software Sustainability 
Software is an integral component of biomedical 
and behavioral research due partly to the speed and 
growth of new technology innovations in software 
and computing, including AI, computer transistors, 
and microchips. NIH collaborates across ICOs to 
support developing and enhancing software tools 
for open science57 by fostering new collaborations 
between biomedical and clinical scientists and 
software engineers. For example, significant progress 
has been made in developing software for client-server 
architectures for data acquisition and progress in 
developing cloud-based data management and data 
analytics. Through partnerships with cloud service 
providers Google, AWS, and Microsoft Azure, NIH has achieved over 275 million compute hours for data 
analysis in the cloud. Yet challenges remain in creating 
FAIR software.
58 The FAIR software principles, similar 
to the FAIR Data principles, ensure that software will be usable beyond a single laboratory or investigator. 
FAIR software principles foster practices to ensure 
larger biomedical research communities sustain 
research software over time. NIH recently issued best 
practices for software sharing
59 that align with the 
FAIR software principles. 
To develop FAIR and sustainable software at a scale 
beyond single academic laboratories requires multi-
disciplinary collaborations from biomedical, computer 
science, and related fields. Today, NIH and other 
federal agencies and non-profits are tackling software 
sustainability head-on, including the NSF program 
on Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific 
Innovation,60 the recent NIH supplements to support 
enhancement of software tools for open science, the 
Schmidt Futures Virtual Institutes for Scientific Software,
61 and the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative’s 
program for Essential Open-Source Software for 
Science.62 A long-standing program at NIH is NCI’s 
Information Technology for Cancer Research (ITCR)63 
program. The ITCR program serves the informatics 
needs of the cancer research continuum and supports informatics resources across the development 
lifecycle (see textbox for ITCR). 
These programs have a common theme: to enable 
investigators to adapt and enhance software and tools 
to take advantage of new technologies and computing 
paradigms, optimize research software for robustness, 
and ultimately increase software sustainability. 
Information Technology for Cancer Research 
(ITCR) supports investigator-initiated, research-
driven informatics technology development 
spanning all aspects of cancer research. The ITCR 
lifecycle approach includes separate funding in 
the following areas: 
❱Algorithm Development 
❱Prototype and Hardening of Software 
❱Enhancement and Dissemination of Software 
❱Software Sustainability 
Implementation Tactics: 
❱Enhance community-focused software development 
and dissemination. 
❱Improve visualization tools to support the scale and 
variety of modern biomedical data. 
❱Establish  metrics and best practices for software 
sustainability and integrate these into the software 
development lifecycle. 
❱Facilitate research activities for software engineers 
and biomedical and computational researchers to 
collaborate. 
❱Develop mentorship programs that pair experienced 
software engineers with early-career researchers and 
software developers. 
❱Explore innovative models for public-private 
partnerships to support software and data innovation 
and sustainability. 
32  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025  – 2030 National Institutes of Health  /  33 
National Institutes of Health  /  35National Institutes of Health  /  35
GOAL 3 
Partnerships and 
Measuring Progress 
Potential measures of progress for this 
goal include an increase in the number of 
software tools that align with the FAIR 
principles and have a measurably enhanced 
user experience, increased citation of NIH 
software across broader communities, software tools that support an increase of 
use cases across various scientific domains, 
and integration of tools from other domains 
into biomedical research. Additional 
measures of progress include improved 
auditing AI of models, development of 
tools for software and algorithms, and 
greater transparency in the development 
and processing of data and models. NIH 
will seek partnerships and collaborations with other federal agencies such as NSF 
and DOE, non-profit organizations, and 
societies and communities like the Research 
Software Alliance.
64
34  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030
National Institutes of Health  /  37 36  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030
OVERAR CHING GOALS , STRA TEGIC OBJECTIVES , 
AND IMPLEMENTA TION TACTICS 
Goal 4 
Support for a Federated Biomedical 
Research Data Infrastructure 
Throughout the last five years, NIH has seen remarkable growth in supporting 
and using biomedical data repositories and platforms for biomedical research. 
More and more of these data infrastructures are moving entirely to the cloud. By 
moving data infrastructures to the cloud, NIH utilizes advanced cybersecurity 
controls and scales data management and computation that can take advantage 
of new technologies while simultaneously creating cost efficiencies and enhancing 
a positive user experience. The challenge is to provide greater connections across 
NIH cloud-based data platforms for easier access to multiple datasets, 
streamlining similar functions, and enabling more facile analytics. 
Current cloud-based data platforms include the 
NHLBI’s BioData Catalyst® ,65 an ecosystem that 
offers data, analytic tools, applications, and 
workflows in secure workspaces to accelerate 
reproducible biomedical research to drive 
scientific advances that can help prevent, 
diagnose, and treat heart, lung, blood, and sleep 
disorders on over 400,000 individuals; NCI’s 
Cancer Research Data Commons (CRDC)66 
which provides secure access to a large, 
comprehensive, and expanding collection of cancer research data; the Kids First Data 
Resource
67 which houses data on 44 childhood 
cancer and structural birth defects cohorts; the 
National Human Genome Research Institute 
(NHGRI)’s Genomic Data Science Analysis, 
Visualization and Informatics Lab-space 
(AnVIL)68 genomic data sharing and analysis 
platform; All of Us69 which has collected data 
from over 500,000 participants; the NIH 
database of Genotypes and Phenotypes 
(dbGaP)70 which has controlled access data 
including sequence, genotype, and/or phenotype data from over 3.2 million research participants; 
and other NIH-supported data platforms. These 
resources are cloud-based data infrastructures 
that provide the research community with data 
and analytical tools, applications, and workflows 
in secure environments. 
NIH ICOs are also developing data ecosystems, 
including the NIH Cloud Platform 
Interoperability initiative;71 the NIBIB’s 
MIDRC72, which provides open access to 300k+ 
curated, AI-ready COVID-19 imaging studies and 
has demonstrated interoperability with BioData 
Catalyst and the N3C; National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) Data 
Ecosystem (see textbox for NIAID Data Ecosystem); the Common Fund Data Ecosystem;
73 and NCBI’s Comparative Genomic 
Resource,74 which aims to integrate genomic data 
across all eukaryotic species. 
With recent and significant migrations of data 
resources to the cloud and the ability to enable 
petabyte-scale data analytics, NIH is responsible for integrating these resources into a federated 
data infrastructure that leverages ideas from 
industry and cutting-edge research. The benefit of 
federating NIH data resources includes 1) easier 
access to and use of data across multiple Institutes’ 
data platforms, 2) economies of scale for NIH to 
support and maintain shared tools and capabilities, 
3) opportunities for communities to collaboratively 
develop and share new methods and workflows, 
and 4) oversight by the community for greater 
transparency and autonomy of data use. In 
collaboration with the NIH ICOs, the agency will 
support the development of innovative data-
sharing platforms, data analytics, and their 
integration. This is integral to the missions of each 
NIH ICO (specific examples found in the National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 
[NIEHS] Strategic Plan)75 and to the overall 
mission of NIH. The broad use of big data 
frameworks and FAIR principles, with continued 
emphasis on partnerships within and outside NIH, 
will result in discoveries. 
National Institutes of Health  /  37 36  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025–2030 The NIAID Data Ecosystem enables simultaneous 
search across 15 infectious- and immune-mediated disease and general data repositories based on metadata. The NIAID Data landscape is highly distributed and requires an ecosystem approach that allows for freedom to operate regarding system, syntactic, and semantic interoperability while requiring a minimal set of FAIR-compliant metadata about existing data access protocols used by the repositories. The NIAID approach to the ecosystem is to leverage FAIR metadata to describe data as well as API’s and other data access protocols to create a FAIR compliant, interoperability layer on top of a diverse landscape of data, software, and services. 
OBJECTIVE 4 -1 
Develop, Test, Validate, and 
Implement Ways to Federate NIH Data and Infrastructure 
As the National Institute on Aging (NIA) Strategic plan 
articulated,76 NIH needs to develop comparable 
databases on health outcomes, risk factors, and 
lifestyles. An emerging paradigm in data science is a 
data-oriented infrastructure that moves away from a 
traditionally centralized data infrastructure. A data-
oriented infrastructure is distributed between data 
repositories or nodes and has shared capabilities and 
services to allow maximum interoperability and 
economies of scale. This requires a common and 
coordinated data access process with shared policy 
and governance. The challenge of a distributed data 
infrastructure is to create a fabric of harmonized 
services (e.g., identity and data access management 
(Authentication [AuthN]/Authorization [AuthZ]), data 
catalogs, search capabilities, and application 
programming interfaces (APIs) that are commonly 
shared, or federated, across the data repositories. In a 
federated paradigm, NIH ICOs and organizations 
supporting biomedical and behavioral research data 
infrastructures will control and manage their data and 
adopt standard processes and interfaces, analysis tools, and services that can be used broadly for biomedicine and behavioral research. In line with this vision, this 
objective aims to improve efficiencies and maximize 
researchers’ ability to find, access, and use data 
generated from federally funded research and stored 
in cloud-based data repositories. NIH’s vision is to 
build a connected and federated data ecosystem to 
ensure that data repositories can be used together 
rather than in isolation. Several NIH ICOs have 
collaborated and developed early capabilities, 
including a common approach for researcher’s access to control access data across a set of data repositories 
(see textbox for Research Auth Service [RAS]) and an 
approach to implement guidelines and technical 
standards to empower end-user analyses across 
participating cloud platforms. In 2020, these 
interoperability standards were piloted. As a result, 
researchers could demonstrate data access across multiple cloud-based NIH data repositories and 
perform combined analysis with meaningful results.
77
These initial piloted efforts are the genesis of an NIH-
wide federated data ecosystem and are articulated as 
priorities in the Future Advanced Computing 
Ecosystem Strategic Plan FY2022 Implementation 
Roadmap78 priorities. 
To capitalize on these early successes, NIH will 
support and enhance a federated biomedical data 
research infrastructure that will create, test, validate, 
and implement a set of sharable services (e.g., 
standard search capabilities, APIs, identity and access 
management (IAM) services, and workspaces/ 
sandboxes). By doing so, NIH will improve efficiencies, 
reduce duplicative funding, and maximize researchers’ 
ability to find, access, and use data generated from 
federally funded research and stored in cloud-based 
data repositories. 
The Researcher Auth Service (RAS) Initiative
is advancing NIH’s data infrastructure and
ecosystem. RAS is an identity and data access
and management service provided by NIH’s
Center for Information T echnology to facilitate
consistent and user-friendly researcher access
to NIH’s controlled-access data. RAS has
adopted the Global Alliance for Genomics and
Health (GA4GH) standards for integrating
researcher-focused applications and datarepositories over the OpenID Connect (OIDC)platform. RAS supports the FY2023 Federal
Cybersecurity R&D S trategic Plan
Implementation R oadmap
 to protect systems
and ensure confidentially, integrity, as well asavailability and privacy of data. The RAS
initiative is advancing data infrastructure and
ecosystem goals as defined in the 2018 NIH
Strategic Plan for Data Science.
An emerging paradigm 
in data science is a data-
oriented infrastructure 
that moves away from a 
traditionally centralized 
data infrastructure. 
Implementation Tactics 
 the utilization of cloud and hybrid
computing architectures and provide opportunities
for low-resource institutions to access and utilize
NIH-supported cloud capabilities.
 efficiency and sharable technologies
across NIH data platforms, including increasing
new and existing technology industry partnerships.
 RAS to increase researchers’ access to data
and ensure accountability for privacy protectionand cybersecurity of systems.❱Enhance
❱Support
❱Expand a robust and connected data resource
ecosystem that supports linkages and interoperability
across NIH-supported cloud platforms for curation,analysis, and sharing of data and metadata.
 new data search and discovery capabilities
by enhancing metadata standards and indexing
techniques and improving data interoperability and
harmonization.
 new paradigms in computing for biomedical
and behavioral applications.❱Ensure
❱Develop
❱Explore
National Institutes of Health  /  39 38  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025–2030
GOAL 4 
Partnerships and 
Measuring Progress 
For this goal, the potential measures of 
progress should advance biomedical 
research through an integrated 
infrastructure and include ease of 
findability of datasets and the ability of 
researchers to integrate NIH data and 
increase the ability to use data across 
the NIH data ecosystem as measured by 
publications. Additional metrics include 
guidance and best practices on 
interoperability so that data, analysis 
tools, and models of biological or 
population systems can be shared more 
easily. This work will require 
partnership and collaboration across 
multiple NIH ICOs and scientific 
organizations such as GA4GH, RDA, 
and Research Software Alliance. 
40  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 40  /  S trategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 National Institutes of Health  /  41National Institutes of Health  /  41
National Institutes of Health  /  43 42  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030
OVERAR CHING GOALS , STRA TEGIC OBJECTIVES , 
AND IMPLEMENTA TION TACTICS 
Goal 5 
Strengthen a Broad 
Community in Data Science 
Data science has become essential to progress in biomedical and 
health research. NIH is committed to building a broad and 
collaborative community that ensures all members – learners, 
researchers, and professionals – can effectively use data science 
skills and knowledge to advance research. 
Meeting the full spectrum of research needs requires talent at varying levels of data 
expertise, including: 
❱Data science literate : Comfortable reading and understanding outcomes from 
data science approaches. 
❱Data science savvy : Data science literate and able to actively use data science 
approaches in designing research projects and collaborating with data scientists. 
❱Data science proficient : Experts in bioinformatics, AI, clinical informatics, 
cloud computing, statistics, computational science, software design and 
programming, bioinformatics, foundational models, visualization, predictive 
analytics, modeling and simulation, and data management and sharing. 
Following the first strategic plan for data science, NIH, through ODSS, has worked 
collaboratively with ICOs on research training and education programs in data 
science. These collective efforts will continue to grow, focusing on increasing the 
data science community to take full advantage of the talent nationwide. A growing 
community will help NIH identify new research questions, facilitate the translation 
of scientific data and findings to the public, and build the public’s trust in data-
driven biomedical research. The time has never been better for all biomedical and 
behavioral researchers to take full advantage of data science, including innovations 
from cloud computing, the availability of significant amounts of biomedical and 
behavioral data, and new advances in AI. To ensure that data science advances in biomedical research can benefit all, NIH will help create a vibrant, innovative, and 
inclusive data science community. 
National Institutes of Health  /  43 42  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 
OBJECTIVE 5 -1 
Increase Training Opportunities 
in Data Science 
Based on the network of existing extramural training 
programs, NIH will coordinate across the ICOs to 
promote data science training and education. The aim 
is to strengthen the support for students and scientists 
from pre-college through early investigator levels and 
provide them with a continuum of competitive funding 
opportunities in data science. Studies show that bright 
minds may be lost to science long before reaching the 
college years. Therefore, early intervention strategies 
in research education are necessary to provide a 
foundation on which essential data skills and visions 
can develop. Promoting focused data science training 
for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will 
help these early researchers develop into independent 
investigators with data science acumen. In addition, 
professional and career development support such as 
access to mentors, soft skills training, and resilience and wellness support are critical to retaining the data 
science trainees in biomedical and behavioral research. Implementation Tactics 
❱Support data science training for students and 
scientists at all academic and career levels from 
pre-college through early investigators. 
❱Increase pairing technical data science training 
with domain-specific knowledge training in NIH 
training programs. 
❱Increase the use of hands-on training in new 
areas such as AI. 
❱Develop requirements of foundational 
elements in data science training such as data 
ethics and cybersecurity. OBJECTIVE 5 -2 
Develop and Advance Initiatives to 
Expand the Data Science Workforce 
Since the first publication of the strategic plan for data 
science, NIH has made significant progress in 
enhancing its administrative and programmatic data 
science workforce to meet the growing needs of 
biomedical and health research. For example, in 2020, 
NIH launched the Data and Technology Advancement 
National Service Scholars (DATA Scholars) Program,79 
which recruited 31 highly skilled data scientists from 
academia, industry, and government to lead 
transformative, high-impact projects across 17 ICOs. 
These scholars spend one to two years at NIH applying 
advanced data science methods, including AI, cloud 
analytics, and interoperability frameworks, to improve 
transparency, reproducibility, and operational 
efficiency. In collaboration with the non-profit 
organization Coding it Forward, NIH has also 
implemented the Civic Digital Fellowship80 program to 
bring to the NIH early-career technologists to spend a 
summer in data-related projects in NIH program 
offices. This program successfully supported 80 
fellows over four years and provides a solid foundation for NIH to expand to a longer-term program. In 
addition to these programs, some NIH ICOs have 
initiated new Offices of Data Science to oversee data 
management and sharing, the responsible use of data, 
data science training to staff, and new funding programs in data science. These efforts strengthen the 
data science workforce within NIH and provide a 
strong foundation for continued growth. In the 
extramural community, NIH will focus on promoting 
the use of data science approaches for established investigators, strengthening data science skills among 
clinician-scientists, and expanding the role of data 
science in funded research nationwide. 
Implementation Tactics 
❱Expand the number of data science investigators and 
broaden data science’s reach in the biomedical and behavioral research community. 
❱Facilitate cross-disciplinary trainee programs in data 
and biomedical sciences. 
❱Enhance the data science knowledge and skill 
building for biomedical and clinician scientists, 
including cross-disciplinary skills. 
❱Facilitate recruitment and retention of innovative 
data science talents at the NIH. 
❱Develop a pathway for early-career data scientists to 
join the NIH. 
These efforts strengthen the data science 
workforce within NIH and provide a strong foundation for continued growth. 
44  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025  – 2030 National Institutes of Health  /  45 
OBJECTIVE 5 -3 
Enhance Data Science 
Collaboration within the NIH Intramural Research Program 
In addition to promoting data science training in the 
extramural community, NIH will also work to broaden the recruitment of data science trainees to the Intramural Research Program ( IRP).
81 The NIH IRP is 
the largest biomedical research institution and conducts long-term, high-impact science that would otherwise be difficult to undertake. Moreover, NIH supports Biowulf,
82 a high-performance computing 
system specifically for use by the intramural NIH community. Biowulf  is consistently ranked in the top 
100-200 of the Top 500 computing infrastructuresworldwide and provides access to a wide range ofcomputational applications for genomics, molecularand structural biology, mathematical and graphicalanalysis, image analysis, and other scientific fields.NIH will foster a steady pipeline of intramural datascience students and researchers, develop a supportivenetwork for data science trainees in the IRP, andenhance intramural computational capabilities torealize new opportunities and partnerships acrossNIH, industries, and other organizations.Implementation Tactics 
❱Coordinate with the NIH Office of Intramural
Training and Education to develop a data science-focused intramural cross-disciplinary trainingprogram that supports mentored researchexperiences for postbaccalaureate, post-master, andpostdoctoral fellows.
❱Support cross-institute intramural data scienceprojects and enhance the interconnectivity of datascientists of all levels.
❱Enable  federated capabilities for data and software
within the NIH IRP.
❱Facilitate opportunities for intramural researchers topartner with the private sector.
❱Enhance NIH’s intramural computing environmentto take advantage of new opportunities in cloudcomputing, AI, and other data science andcomputing initiatives.OBJECTIVE 5 -4 
Broaden and Champion Capacity 
Building and Community 
Engagement Efforts
Developing and sustaining a biomedical and 
behavioral research workforce that reflects the communities being served and supported in an environment that nurtures their success is essential to advancing health research. However, many 
researchers 
and institutions continue to encounter challenges in leveraging data science, including easy access to cloud computing environments, sufficient training and mentoring in data science, and opportunities to apply their unique expertise to biomedical challenges. NIH is committed to broadening participation in data science by engaging a wider range of institutions and investing in efforts to grow human capital, enhance institutional infrastructure, and build partnerships. 
Following the first strategic plan for data science, new 
programs have resulted from data science partnerships with the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS), including enhancement to the IDeA Networks of Biomedical Research Excellence (INBRE) program to support new data science cores and the development of cloud-based learning modules for the NIH CloudLab. Institutional data science capacity has been enhanced through administrative supplements supported in collaboration with several ICOs. Training activities have included workshops and professional certificates. At the same time, new computing infrastructure continues to support data science practices, and partnerships with industry and federal laboratories provide access to real-world applications. NIH also supported efforts in the Native American Research Centers for Health (NARCH) program (see box for NARCH) to advance data science training, hire experts, develop early-stage investigator careers, and coordinate tribally managed health organizations. These efforts offer a platform for research and collaboration as well as a way to inspire interest in aspiring new data scientists. NIH will continue to develop and expand activities and events to attract a wider community. The Native American Research Centers for 
Health (NARCH) program supports
federally recognized American Indian and
Alaska Native (AI/AN) T ribes and tribally
based organizations in research, capacity
building, and career development
opportunities. The program fosters
partnerships between tribes and research
institutions, supports health research,
provides AI/AN researchers training, and
strengthens community research
infrastructure to improve health outcomes.
NARCH projects have actively focused on
data science. Highlights from NAR CH project
teams include establishing data repositories
and governance frameworks, organizing
data science conferences, and offering
training courses on grant writing, data
management, biostatistics, and AI.
Implementation Tactics 
❱Collaborate with existing NIH programs to
develop and expand programs to enhance datascience capacity in nationwide institutions.
❱Leverage datasets in NIH-supported datarepositories and data platforms as trainingresources.
❱Build  synergies across government, academic,
non-profit, international, and industrystakeholders.
46  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 –  2030 National Institutes of Health  /  47
GOAL 5 
Partnerships and 
Measuring Progress 
For this goal, potential measures of 
progress include an increase in the number 
of data science trainees and the number of 
trainees leveraging NIH-supported data 
platforms, as well as an increase in the 
number of trainees who matriculate to data 
science careers, data scientists recruited to 
the NIH, and intramural scientists 
developing and utilizing NIH supported 
software. Additional measures may include 
the products of the trainees and scientists, 
including publications, patents, models, 
and technologies. NIH will seek 
partnerships and collaborations with other 
federal agencies, non-profit organizations, 
and private sector industries. 
48  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030
Endnotes 
1 https://sharing.nih.gov/data-management-and-sharing-policy
2 FAIR data denotes Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable datasets.
3 https://datascience.nih.gov/strategicplan
4 NIH defines metadata as information intended to make scientific data citable, interpretable , and reusable.
5 www.hl7.org/
6 https://datascience.nih.gov/clinical- 
7 https://allofus.nih.gov/ 
8 https://ncats.nih.gov/n3c 
9 www.nih.gov/research-training/medical-research-initiatives/radx
10 www.nibib.nih.gov/covid-19/radx-tech-program/mars 
11 commonfund.nih.gov/bridge2ai
12 www.gida-global.org/care
13 www.nimhd.nih.gov/resources/schare/
14 ncats.nih.gov/funding/challenges/bias-detection-tools-in-health-care
15 https://datascience.nih.gov/strides 
16 https://datascience.nih.gov/sites/default/files/NIH%20Search%20Workshop%20Summary%20Final.pdf 
17 https://ocio.nih.gov/Documents/Digital%20NIH%20Strategy_2023.02.06_Final_508C.pdf 
18 www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/05-2022-Desirable-Characteristics-of-Data-R epositories.pdf 
19 Lin, D., Crabtree, J., Dillo, I. et al. The TRUST Principles for digital repositories. Sci Data 7, 144 (2020). 
20 https://ncats.nih.gov/aspire
21   Jorgenson LA, Wolinetz CD, Collins FS. Incentivizing a New Culture of Data Stewardship: The NIH Policy for Data 
Management and Sharing. JAMA. 2021;326(22):2259–2260
22 https://sharing.nih.gov 
23 www.nlm.nih.gov/NIHbmic/domain_specific_repositories.html
24   For this document, data stewards provide guidance on data quality, inclusion of appropriate metadata, appropri -
ate data standard usage, data governance and limitations of data use.
25  https://cde.nlm.nih.gov/home 
26   https://evs.nci.nih.gov/ 
27   https://datascience.cancer.gov/resources/metadata 
28   https://heal.nih.gov/ 
29 https://datacommons.cancer.gov/cancer-data-aggregator 
30  www.facebase.org/
31   https://health.mitre.org/mcode
32   https://iamhrf.org/projects/driving-adoption-common-measures 
33   https://datascience.nih.gov/news/nih-joins-datacite-consortium 
34   grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/not-od-22-214.html
35  www.coretrustseal.org
36   www.rd-alliance.org 
37 www.dataone.org
38   https://osf.io
39   https://datacite.org
40  https://wellcome.org 
41   https://globalbiodata.org/
42   www.insdc.org/ 
43   sharing.nih.gov/data-management-and-sharing-policy/protecting-participant-privacy-when-sharing-scientif -
ic-data/considerations-for-obtaining-informed-consent44 www.midrc.org 
45 www.nei.nih.gov/sites/default/files/2021-12/NEI-StrategicPlan-VisionForTheFuture_508_edit.pdf 
46 www.nichd.nih.gov/about/org/od/odss#projects
47   www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/index.html
48   www.niddk.nih.gov/about-niddk/strategic-plans-reports/niddk-strategic-plan-for-research
49   www.ninds.nih.gov/modules/custom/ninds/assets/files/NINDS_Strategic_Plan_2021-2026_Final_508C.pdf
50   AI includes knowledge representation, machine learning, natural language processing, computer vision and per -
ception, deep learning, and language models.
51   www.congress.gov/116/crpt/hrpt617/CRPT-116hrpt617.pdf#page=1218
52   www.ai.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/NAIRR-TF-Final-Report-2023.pdf
53 https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.AI.100-1
54 www.nichd.nih.gov/sites/default/files/2019-09/NICHD_Strategic_Plan.pdf
55   www.nimh.nih.gov/sites/default/files/documents/about/strategic-planning-reports/NIMH%20S trategic%20
Plan%20for%20Research_2022_0.pdf
56   www.nhlbi.nih.gov/about/strategic-vision 
57 www.nhlbi.nih.gov/sites/default/files/2017-11/NHLBI-Strategic-Vision-2016_FF.pdf 
58 https://datascience.nih.gov/tools-and-analytics/administrative-supplements-to-support-enhancement-of-soft -
ware-tools-for-open-science
59   Barker, M., Chue Hong, N.P., Katz, D.S. et al. Introducing the FAIR Principles for research software.
Sci Data 9, 622 (2022). 
60 datascience.nih.gov/tools-and-analytics/best-practices-for-sharing-research-software-faq
61   https://beta.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/cyberinfrastructure-sustained-scientific
62   www.schmidtfutures.com/our-work/virtual-institute-for-scientific-software
63 https://chanzuckerberg.com/eoss
64   https://itcr.cancer.gov/about-itcr
65   https://www.researchsoft.org
66   https://biodatacatalyst.nhlbi.nih.gov
67   https://datascience.cancer.gov/data-commons
68 https://kidsfirstdrc.org
69 https://anvilproject.org
70   https://allofus.nih.gov
71 www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap/
72 https://datascience.nih.gov/nih-cloud-platform-interoperability-effort
73 www.midrc.org
74   https://commonfund.nih.gov/dataecosystem
75   www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/comparative-genomics-resource
76   www.niehs.nih.gov/about/strategicplan/strategicplan20182023_508.pdf 
77   www.nia.nih.gov/sites/default/files/2020-05/nia-strategic-directions-2020-2025.pdf
78 Inverting the model of genomics data sharing with the NHGRI Genomic Data Science Analysis, Visualization, and 
Informatics Lab-space (AnVIL) (biorxiv.org)
79 www.nitrd.gov/pubs/FACE-SP-FY22-Implementation-Roadmap.pdf 
80   https://datascience.nih.gov/data-scholars-2022-closed#overview 
81   www.codingitforward.com/fellowships 
82   irp.nih.gov/
83 hpc.nih.gov/
50  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025  – 2030 National Institutes of Health  /  51
APPENDIX 1 
Accomplishments 
From the first NIH Strategic Plan for Data Science
GOAL 1 
Support a Highly 
Efficient and Effective 
Biomedical Research Data Infrastructur e 
❱NIH’s P artnership with Google
Cloud Services, Amazon W eb
Services, and Microsoft Azure
through the STRIDES program
has resulted in over 200
petabytes of biomedical data
on the cloud, 320 compute
hours, 5,000 researchers
trained, 1,300 program workers
working in the cloud, and
the development of the NIH
CloudLab.
❱The development of the RAS
for single sign-on and efficient
data access across NIH data
platforms includes integrating
over 30 data programs into RAS
and partnering with Internet2.
❱NIH has made further efforts
to connect NIH data platformsthrough the NIH Cloud Platform
Interoperability program with
a partnership between NLM,
NHGRI, NHLBI, NCI, and the
Common Fund, resulting from
single sign-on and cross-
platform data analysis.GOAL 2 
Promote Modernization of the Data-Resources Ecosystem 
❱NIH has supported funding
opportunities for data resources
(databases and knowledgebases),
which have resulted in 17 new
awards across 7 NIH Institutesand Centers. NIH has also
supported supplemental funding
to existing databases to align
with the OSTP characteristics for
FAIR data repositories, which has
resulted in 21 awards across 12
NIH Institutes and Centers.
❱NIH has also launched the GREI,
partnering with 7 generalistrepositories to establish a
common set of cohesive andconsistent capabilities, services,
metrics, and social infrastructure
across them. This initiative
conducted several webinars
with over 1,100 attendees,
enabled open metrics in the
MakeDataCount Project, and
created “Search by Funder and
Grant ID” metadata fields in
participating repositories.
❱NIH has also partnered with
DataCite to support the ability
to find and cite NIH-funded datavia the use of persistent unique
identifiers.❱NIH has partnered with NLM and
the Data Curation Network to
provide ongoing training in datamanagement and sharing forresearchers, data resource staff,
and NIH program staff
❱NIH has partnered with F ASEB to
offer the first-ever Data Sharing
and Data R euse prize, resulting
in over 100 applicants and 12
finalists, with two grand prize
winners.
❱NIH has also partnered with
HL7® to support training inFast Healthcare Interoperable
Resources and supported NIH
Institutes in leveraging FHIR®
for clinical data platforms. NIH
partnered with the RD A and
HL7® to develop and publish
a FHIR® implementation guide
with 6 real-world use cases,
assessing the impact of FHIR®
implementation using F AIR data
metrics.GOAL 3 
Support the Development 
and Dissemination 
of Advanced Data 
Management, Analytics, 
and Visualization Tools 
❱NIH has supported
supplemental funding for NIH-
funded software, tools, and
workflows to develop robust,
sustainable, cloud-ready
capabilities, resulting in 94
awards across 19 NIH Institutesand Centers.
❱NIH partnered with NSF on
Smart and Connected Health
for AI and data science, which
resulted in 17 awards from 11
NIH Institutes and Centers.
❱NIH developed a Software
Best Practices document for
sharing research software andsource code, developed under
research grants in any stage
of development, in a free andopen format.GOAL 4 
Enhance Workforce 
Development for Biomedical Data Science 
❱NIH launched the DAT A Scholar
Program to bring together data
experts, computer scientists, and
engineers to tackle challenging
biomedical data problems with
the potential for substantial public
health impact. The program hasresulted in 31 DAT A Scholars
across 17 NIH Institutes and
Centers. Of the 23 Scholars who
have completed the program, 11
chose to continue in longer-term
positions at the NIH.
❱NIH partnered with the Civic
Digital Fellows program to bring
80 Coding-it-Forward fellows
to NIH over four consecutive
summers.
❱NIH has supported code-a-thons
to encourage broad participation
in data science, including forming
coding partnerships with the
African Society for Bioinformatics
and Computational Biology. NIH
funded 24 new awards supporting
initiatives that advanced research
training, education, and capacity
building in data science.GOAL 5 
Enact Appropriate Policies 
to Promote Stewardship 
and Sustainability 
NIH published the 2023 NIHData Management and SharingPolicy, which includes new
training and infrastructure
support for its implementation.
52  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 –  2030 National Institutes of Health  /  53
APPENDIX 2 
List of Abbreviations 
AI 
Artificial Intelligence 
AI/AN 
American Indians and Alaska Natives 
AnVIL 
Genomic Analysis, Visualization and Informatics 
Lab-space 
API   
Application Programming Interface 
ASPIRE 
A Specialized Platform for Innovative Research 
Exploration 
ASTP 
Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy 
AWS 
Amazon Web Services 
Bridge2AI 
Bridge to Artificial Intelligence 
caDSR 
cancer Data Standards Registry and Repository 
CARE 
Collective benefit, Authority to control, 
Responsibility, and Ethics 
CADRs 
Controlled-Access Data Repositories 
CDE 
Common Data Element 
CMS 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
CRDC 
Cancer Research Data Commons 
DATA Scholars 
Data and Technology Advancement National 
Service Scholars 
dbGAP 
database of Genotypes and Phenotypes 
DMS Policy 
Policy for Data Management and Sharing 
DOE 
Department of Energy 
DSPC 
Data Science Policy Council 
EHRs 
Electronic Health Records 
EVS 
Enterprise Vocabulary Services FAIR 
Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable 
FAQs 
Frequently Asked Questions 
FHIR® 
Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources 
GA4GH 
Global Alliance for Genomics and Health 
GREI 
Generalist Repository Ecosystem Initiative 
HEAL 
Helping End Addiction Long-Term 
HHS 
Health and Human Services 
HL7® 
Health Level Seven International 
IAM 
Identify and Access Management 
ICs 
Institutes and Centers 
ICOs 
Institutes, Centers, and Offices 
INBRE 
IDeA Networks of Biomedical Research Excellence 
IRP 
Intramural Research Program 
IT 
Information Technology 
ITCR 
Information Technology for Cancer Research 
LLM 
Large Language Model 
LOINC 
Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes 
MARS 
Mobile At-Home Reporting through Standards 
mCODE 
Minimal Common Oncology Data Elements 
MIDRC 
Medical Imaging and Data Resource Center 
ML 
Machine Learning 
MOST 
Maintainable, Observing, Securing, and Timing 
N3C 
National Clinical Cohort Collaborative NARCH 
Native American Research Centers for Health 
NAIRR 
National AI Research Resource 
NCATS 
National Center for Advancing Translational 
Sciences 
NCI 
National Cancer Institute 
NEI 
National Eye Institute 
NHGRI 
National Human Genome Research Institute 
NHLBI 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
NIA 
National Institute on Aging 
NIAID 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases 
NIBIB 
National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering 
NICHD 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development 
NIDCR 
National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research 
NIDDK 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases 
NIEHS 
National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences 
NIGMS 
National Institute of General Medical Sciences 
NIH 
National Institutes of Health 
NIMH 
National Institute of Mental Health 
NINDS 
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke 
NIST 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
NLM 
National Library of Medicine NNLM 
Network of the National Library of Medicine 
NSF 
National Science Foundation 
NSTC 
National Science and Technology Council 
ODSS 
Office of Data Science Strategy 
OER 
Office of Extramural Research 
OIDC 
OpenID Connect 
OMOP 
Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership 
OSP 
Office of Science Policy 
OSTP 
Office of Science, Technology, and Policy 
PROs 
Patient-Reported Outcomes 
RAS 
Researcher Auth Service 
RDA 
Research Data Alliance 
RDCRN 
Rare Diseases Clinical Research Network 
RMF 
Risk Management Framework 
RWD 
Real-World Data 
SDC 
Scientific Data Council 
SNOMED   
Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine 
STRIDES 
Science and Technology Research Infrastructure 
for Discovery, Experimentation, and Sustainability 
TEFCA 
Trusted Exchange Framework and Common 
Agreement 
TRUST 
Transparency, Responsibility, User focus, 
Sustainability, and Technology 
UMLS 
Unified Medical Language System 
USCDI+ 
United States Core Data for Interoperability Plus 
54  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 National Institutes of Health  /  55 
This new strategic plan is 
built on more than five 
years of investment into 
the creation of a strong 
foundation for a modern 
biomedical data ecosystem. 
As we look boldly to the 
future, we will build on that 
foundation to advance new, 
sustainable, trustworthy 
capabilities and enable 
a strong workforce 
community that leverages data science to inform discovery and care for all. 
Dr. Susan Gregurick 
Associate Director for Data Science 
and the Director of ODSS 
56  /  Strategic Plan for Data Science  /  2025 – 2030 