Correspondencewww.thelancet.com   Vol 406   October 18, 2025  1725and the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) 
countries (3 ·66), as well as fewer nurses 
per 1000 population (Taiwan [3 ·30] vs 
Japan [12 ·10], South Korea [8 ·37], and 
OECD countries [9 ·66]).3 More than 
35% of physicians in Taiwan work more than 60 h per week, more than 50% of those under pay-for-performance schemes do not receive bonuses, and more than 40% of physicians under bundled payments are required to share losses.
4 Excessive work hours 
and inequitable compensation contribute to physician burnout and dissatisfaction, which can lead health-care professionals to leave their positions or exit the medical field.
4,5 
Future reforms must therefore move beyond tinkering with reimbursement formulas and should rebalance workload, align monetary and non-monetary incentives with value-based care, and introduce rational cost-sharing to curb unnecessary use. We believe that embedding sustainability in system redesign is essential to preserving Taiwan’s universal health coverage and ensuring resilience against future crises.
We declare no competing interests.
Editorial note: The Lancet Group takes a neutral 
position with respect to territorial claims in published text and institutional affiliations.
*Po-Chang Lee, Cheng-Han Lee, 
Chiehfeng Chen, Min-Huei Hsu, Enoch Kang
pochang@mail.ncku.edu.tw
College of Public Health, Taipei Medical University, 
Taipei, Taiwan (P-CL); Department of Surgery, Shung-Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical University, New Taipei City 23561, Taiwan (P-CL); Department of Surgery, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan (C-HL); Department of Public Health, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (CC); Cochrane Taiwan, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (CC, EK); Division of Plastic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (CC); Graduate Institute of Data Science, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (M-HH); Institute of Health Policy & Management, College of Public Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan (EK)
1 Li J-X, Hsu S-B. Retraction—Taiwan’s national 
health care on the brink of systemic collapse. 
Lancet 2025; 405: 2036.6 Muzaffar M. T ransgender woman wins record 
compensation for ‘electric shock treatment’. UK: Independent. Nov 22, 2024. https://www.independent.co.uk/asia/china/china-transgender-woman-linger-compensation-electoshock-treatment-b2651722.html (accessed July 28, 2025).
7 Montiel A. Thailand’ s Public Health Ministry 
will allocate more than $4 million for trans health care. Yahoo News. Jan 25, 2025. https://www.yahoo.com/news/thailand-public-health-ministry-allocate-181750787 .html (accessed July 28, 2025).
8 Christopher AM. From silence to canvas: the 
role of artivism in transforming gender and sexuality norms. Sex Cult 2025; 29: 97–121.
9 Asia Pacific Transgender Network. Towards 
transformative healthcare: Asia Pacific trans health and rights module. Dec 19, 2021. https://www.weareaptn.org/resource/towards-transformative-healthcare-asia-pacific-trans-health-and-rights-module (accessed July 28, 2025).Regionally, the Asia Pacific Transgender 
Network supports providers in delivering culturally competent, rights-based clinical care by providing training modules available in multiple languages, including Bahasa, Burmese, and Tagalog.
9
Overall, focusing predominantly on 
persisting barriers risks overlooking and undermining the important, context-specific gains achieved in Asia, which have been made through community activism, progressive judgements, legislative adoption, public funding, and capacity building. These advances in Asia could offer replicable frameworks, strategies, and exemplars for advancing transgender rights and health care beyond the region.
I declare no competing interests.
During the preparation of this Correspondence the 
author used  Grammarly and Quillbot for editing support. After using these tools, the author reviewed and edited the content as needed and takes full responsibility for the content of the Correspondence.
Rowalt Alibudbud
rowaltalibudbud@dlsu.edu.ph
Department of Sociology and Behavioral Sciences, De La Salle University, Manila 1004, Philippines; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Medicine, University of the Philippines–Philippine General Hospital, Manila, Philippines
1 Restar AJ, Rodriguez-Diaz CE, Breslow AS, et al. 
Reinforcing social safety for transgender and 
non-binary communities amidst global legislative threats. Lancet 2025; 406: 110–13.
2 The Associated Press. Japan court approves a 
trans man’s request for legal recognition without needing surgery. NBC News. Feb 7, 2024. https://www.nbcnews.com/nbc-out/out-news/japan-court-approves-trans-mans-request-legal-recognition-needing-surg-rcna137736 (accessed July 28, 2025).
3 Bhattacharya S, Ghosh D, Purka yastha B. 
‘Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act’ of India: an analysis of substantive access to rights of a transgender community. J Hum Rights Pract 2022; 14: 676–97 .
4 Leung K. Hong Kong judge rules in fav or of 
transgender bathroom access. ABC News. July 25, 2025. https://abcnews.go.com/International/wireStory/hong-kong-judge-rules-favor-transgender-bathroom-access-123986739 (accessed July 28, 2025).
5 Menon P. Denying access to restrooms has 
serious health ramifications for gender non-conforming people. The Hindu. Dec 11, 2024. https://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/health/denying-access-to-restrooms-has-serious-health-ramifications-for-gender-non-conforming-people/article68968229.ece (accessed July 28, 2025).Systemic strains and 
reform imperatives in Taiwan’s health-care system
We commend  Jing-Xing Li and Shu-
Bai Hsu for their courage in retracting 
their Correspondence upon discovering 
inaccuracies in the presentation of information and references concerning Taiwan’s health-care system.
1 
Nevertheless, their Correspondence warrants attention because it deconstructs the urgent and persistent challenges within emergency departments, illustrating how fee-for-service and universal health coverage models interact with high health-care demands and workforce shortages.
2 
The fee-for-service model, which reimburses providers for prescriptions and diagnostic tests, has inadvertently prioritised quantity over quality.
3 
National health insurance with low co-payments ensures high accessibility, but also contributes to irresponsible resource use and a high physician–patient ratio, which unavoidably places considerable strain on the health-care system.
3 Taiwan also faces a persistent 
shortage of health-care professionals. In 2020, Taiwan had fewer doctors 
per 1000 population (2 ·39) c ompared 
with Japan (2 ·60),  South Korea (2 ·51) , 
Correspondence1726  www.thelancet.com   Vol 406   October 18, 2025Germany (PB, RDJ); Department of Haematology and 
Stem Cell Transplantation, West German Cancer Center and German Cancer Consortium, University Hospital Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany (BvT); Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, Germany (RJ)
1 Abramson JS, Ku M, Hertzberg M, et al. 
Glofitamab plus gemcitabine and oxaliplatin (GemOx) versus rituximab-GemOx for relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (STARGLO): a global phase 3, randomised, open-label trial. Lancet 2024; 
404: 1940–54.
2 Kamdar M, Solomon SR, Arnason J, et al. Lisocabtagene maraleucel versus standard of care with salvage chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation as second-line treatment in patients with relapsed or refractory large B-cell lymphoma (TRANSFORM): results from an interim analysis of an open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2022; 399: 2294–308.
3 Locke FL, Miklos DB, Jacobson CA, et al. 
Axicabtagene ciloleucel as second-line therapy for large B-cell lymphoma. N Engl J Med 2022; 386: 640–54.B-cell lymphoma is 10.2 months 
versus 25.5 months for all patients. We thus encourage Abramson and colleagues to provide treatment-specific Kaplan–Meier analyses of OS and progression-free survival for patients with primary refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Given the study’s median follow-up of 20 months—twice the median OS in this cohort—such exploratory Kaplan–Meier analyses could yield valuable insights without additional follow-up and would allow estimation of survival outcomes beyond the median time-to-event and potential levels of plateauing. These analyses are urgently needed to help physicians and patients in search of a cure to make informed decisions about the treatment options for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
PB reports research funding from Incyte, Merck Sharp 
& Dohme, Miltenyi Biotec, and Takeda Oncology; consulting fees from Bristol Myers Squibb/Celgene, Gilead Kite, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Miltenyi Biotec, Roche, and Takeda Oncology; honoraria for lectures or presentations from AstraZeneca, AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb/Celgene, Gilead Kite, Incyte, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Miltenyi Biomedicine, Roche, Beigene, and Takeda Oncology; and travel grants from Bristol Myers Squibb/Celgene, Gilead Kite, Incyte, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Miltenyi Biotec, Roche, and Takeda Oncology. BvT reports research funding from Esteve, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, and Takeda; consulting fees from AbbVie, Allogene, Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb/Celgene, Cerus, Gilead Kite, Incyte, IQVIA, Janssen-Cilag, Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Miltenyi, Novartis, Noscendo, Pentixapharm, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre, Qualworld, Regeneron, Roche, Serb, Sobi, and Takeda; honoraria for lectures or presentations from AbbVie, AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers Squibb/Celgene, Gilead Kite, Incyte, Janssen-Cilag, Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, Roche, Serb, and Takeda; travel grants from AbbVie, AstraZeneca, Gilead Kite, Janssen-Cilag, Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Pierre Fabre, Roche, Takeda, and Novartis; and participation on steering committees for Regeneron and Takeda. RDJ reports payment or 
honoraria for lectures and presentations from AstraZeneca, BeOne, Janssen, and Roche; support for attending meetings and travel from Lilly, BeOne, and Janssen; and participation on an advisory board for BeOne.
*Peter Borchmann, 
Ron D Jachimowicz, Bastian von Tresckow
peter.borchmann@uk-koeln.de
Faculty of Medicine, University of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany (PB, RDJ); Department I of Internal Medicine, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne 50937, Germany (PB, RDJ); Center for Integrated Oncology Aachen Bonn Cologne Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, 2 Li J-X, Hsu S-B. RETRACTED: Taiwan’s national 
health care on the brink of systemic collapse. 
Lancet 2025; 405: 1460–61.
3 Tsuei SH-T. Reflection on 30 years of Taiwanese 
national health insurance: analysis of Taiwanese health system progress, challenges, and opportunities. J Formos Med Assoc 2024; 
123: S180-87 .
4 Tung Y-C, Chou Y-Y, Chang Y-H, Chung K-P. 
Association of intrinsic and extrinsic motivating factors with physician burnout and job satisfaction: a nationwide cross-sectional survey in Taiwan. BMJ Open 2020; 10: e035948.
5 Hsu AY, Lin C-J. The Taiwan health-care system: 
approaching a crisis point? Lancet 2024; 404: 745–46.
Jeremy S  Abramson and colleagues 
reported that glofitamab plus 
gemcitabine and oxaliplatin (GemOx) significantly improved overall survival (OS) in transplant-ineligible patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma compared with rituximab plus GemOx.
1
Interestingly, progression-free 
survival (PFS) within the first 3 months of treatment was markedly improved with glofitamab plus GemOx (figure 2B of the original Article), but the 3-month OS was similar between the groups (figure 2A of the original Article).
1 This discrepancy 
between improved PFS and similar OS at 3 months  suggests that early 
progression in the rituximab plus GemOx group was offset by effective salvage therapy, a pattern that was observed throughout the study period. Conversely, PFS and OS were closely aligned in the glofitamab plus GemOx group, indicating a limited benefit from salvage treatments after relapse. Although glofitamab plus GemOx improved overall outcomes, the high proportion of non-responders highlights the importance of early identification of responders.
Subgroup analysis also revealed 
significantly better outcomes in Asian patients treated with glofitamab plus Glofitamab with GemOx 
for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
We commend Jeremy S Abramson and 
colleagues for their study showing a relevant overall survival (OS) benefit for glofitamab plus gemcitabine and oxaliplatin (GemOx) over rituximab plus GemOx in patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (the STARGLO trial).
1 Abramson and colleagues 
acknowledge that “due to the evolving global treatment standards for CAR [chimeric antigen receptor] T-cell therapies during the period of study enrolment, patients who were candidates for CAR T-cell therapy at study entry were not excluded from STARGLO”.
1 Notably, 58% of patients 
in the STARGLO trial were treated for primary refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. For these patients at high risk of second-line failure, CAR T-cell therapy is approved irrespective of transplant eligibility and has shown curative potential, as evidenced by a plateau in the survival curves.
1,2 The 
presented Kaplan–Meier analyses illustrate outcomes for treatment groups but not for relevant risk factors within each group. However, the presented univariate analysis of risk factors suggests a highly relevant effect of refractoriness on survival outcomes with glofitamab plus GemOx: the median OS for patients with primary refractory diffuse large 